
311.0




English is not an official language of the Swiss Confederation. This translation is 
provided for information purposes only and has no legal force.



Swiss Criminal Code 

of 21 December 1937 (Status as of 1 July 2024)

The Federal Assembly the Swiss Confederation,
based on Article 123 paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Federal Constitution ,  
and having considered a Federal Council Dispatch dated 23 July 1918 ,
decrees:
Book One:  General Provisions
Part One: Felonies and Misdemeanours
Title One: Scope of Application
Art. 1
1. No penalty 
without a law
A penalty or measure may only be imposed for an act that has been 
expressly declared to be an offence by law.
Art. 2
2. Commence-
ment of applica-
bility of the 
Code
1 This Code applies to any person who commits a felony or misde-
meanour following the date on which it comes into force.
2 Any person who commits a felony or misdemeanour prior to this 
Code coming into force is only subject to its terms in the event that the 
penalty hereunder is less than the penalty that would otherwise apply.
Art. 3
3. Territorial 
scope of 
application
Felonies or 
misdemeanours 
in Switzerland
1 Any person who commits a felony or misdemeanour in Switzerland 
is subject to this Code.
2 If the person concerned has served a sentence in full or in part for the 
offence in another country, the Swiss court must take the sentence 
served into account in determining the sentence to be imposed.
3 If the person concerned has been prosecuted in a foreign country at 
the request of the Swiss authorities, then unless the offence involves a 
gross violation of the principles of the Federal Constitution or the 
Convention from 4 November 1950  for the protection of Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR), he is not prosecuted in 
Switzerland for the same offence if:
a.	the foreign court has acquitted him and the judgment has taken 
full legal effect;
b.	the penalty to which he had been sentenced in the foreign 
country has been served, remitted or become time-barred.
4 If the person prosecuted abroad at the request of the Swiss authori-
ties has not served the sentence or has only served it in part, the whole 
sentence or the remainder shall be served in Switzerland. The court 
decides whether a measure that has not been executed abroad or has 
only been served in part must be executed or continued in Switzer-
land.
Art. 4
Felonies or 
misdemeanours 
against the state 
committed 
abroad 
1 This Code also applies to any person who commits a felony or 
misdemeanour in a foreign country against the Swiss state or its 
national security (Art. 265-278).
2 If the person concerned has been convicted of the offence and has 
served the sentence in full or in part in another country, the court shall 
take the sentence served into account in determining the sentence to be 
imposed.
Art. 5
Offences against 
minors abroad 
1 This Code also applies to any person who is in Switzerland, is not 
being extradited and has committed any of the following offences 
abroad:
a. 	trafficking in human beings (Art. 182), indecent assault 
(Art. 189 paras 2 and 3), rape (Art. 190 paras 2 and 3), abuse 
of persons incapable of proper judgment or resistance 
(Art. 191) or encouraging prostitution (Art. 195) if the victim 
was less than 18 years of age;
abis. 	sexual acts with dependent persons (Art. 188) and sexual acts 
with minors against payment (Art. 196);
b.	sexual acts with children (Art. 187) if the victim was less than 
14 years of age;
c. 	aggravated pornography (Art. 197 para. 3 and 4) if the items 
or recordings depict sexual acts with minors.
2 Unless the offence involves a gross violation of the principles of the 
Federal Constitution and the ECHR , the person concerned is not 
liable to further prosecution in Switzerland for the offence if:
a.	he has been acquitted of the offence abroad in a legally bind-
ing judgment;
b.	the sentence that was imposed abroad has been served, remit-
ted, or become time-barred.
3 If the person concerned has been convicted of the offence abroad and 
if the sentence imposed abroad has been partly served, the court shall 
take the part served into account in the sentence to be imposed. The 
court decides whether a measure ordered abroad but only partly exe-
cuted there must be continued or taken into account in the sentence 
imposed in Switzerland.
Art. 6
Offences 
committed 
abroad prosecut-
ed in terms of an 
international 
obligation
1 Any person who commits a felony or misdemeanour abroad that 
Switzerland is obliged to prosecute in terms of an international con-
vention is subject to this Code provided:
a.	the act is also liable to prosecution at the place of commission 
or no criminal law jurisdiction applies at the place of commis-
sion; and
b.	the person concerned remains in Switzerland and is not extra-
dited to the foreign country.
2 The court determines the sentence so that overall the person con-
cerned is not treated more severely than would have been the case 
under the law at the place of commission.
3 Unless the offence involves a gross violation of the principles of the 
Federal Constitution and of the ECHR , the person concerned is not 
liable to further prosecution in Switzerland if:
a.	he has been acquitted of the offence abroad in a legally bind-
ing judgment;
b.	the sentence that was imposed abroad has been served, remit-
ted, or become time-barred.
4 If the person concerned has been convicted of the offence abroad and 
if the sentence imposed abroad has been partly served, the court shall 
take the part served into account in the sentence to be imposed. The 
court decides whether a measure ordered abroad but only partly exe-
cuted there must be continued or taken into account in the sentence 
imposed in Switzerland.
Art. 7
Other offences 
committed 
abroad
1 Any person who commits a felony or misdemeanour abroad where 
the requirements of Articles 4, 5 or 6 are not fulfilled is subject to this 
Code if:
a.	the offence is also liable to prosecution at the place of com-
mission or the place of commission is not subject to criminal 
law jurisdiction;
b.	the person concerned is in Switzerland or is extradited to 
Switzerland due to the offence; and
c.	under Swiss law extradition is permitted for the offence, but 
the person concerned is not being extradited.
2 If the person concerned is not Swiss and if the felony or misdemean-
our was not committed against a Swiss person, paragraph 1 is applica-
ble only if:
a.	the request for extradition was refused for a reason unrelated 
to the nature of the offence; or
b.	the offender has committed a particularly serious felony that is 
proscribed by the international community.
3 The court shall determine the sentence so that overall the person 
concerned is not treated more severely than would have been the case 
under the law at the place of commission.
4 Unless the offence involves a gross violation of the principles of the 
Federal Constitution and the ECHR , the person concerned is not 
liable to further prosecution in Switzerland for the offence if:
a.	he has been acquitted of the offence abroad in a legally bind-
ing judgment;
b.	the sentence that was imposed abroad has been served, remit-
ted, or become time-barred.
5 If the person concerned has been convicted of the offence abroad and 
if the sentence imposed abroad has been partly served, the court shall 
take the part served into account in the sentence to be imposed. The 
court decides whether a measure ordered abroad but only partly exe-
cuted there must be continued or taken into account in the sentence 
imposed in Switzerland.
Art. 8
Place of 
commission
1 A felony or misdemeanour is considered to be committed at the 
place where the person concerned commits it or unlawfully omits to 
act, and at the place where the offence has taken effect
2 An attempted offence is considered to be committed at the place 
where the person concerned attempted it and at the place where he 
intended the offence to take effect.
Art. 9
4. Personal scope 
of application
1 This Code does not apply to persons whose offences are subject to 
military criminal law.
2 For persons who have not attained the age of 18 at the time of the 
offence, the provisions of the Juvenile Criminal Law Act of 20 June 
2003  (JCLA) are reserved. Where an offence committed before and 
after attaining the age of 18 must be judged, Article 3 paragraph 2 
JCLA applies. 

Title Two: Criminal Liability
Art. 10
1. Felonies and 
misdemeanours
Definition
1 In this Code, felonies are distinguished from misdemeanours accord-
ing to the severity of the penalties that the offence carries.
2 Felonies are offences that carry a custodial sentence of more than 
three years.
3 Misdemeanours are offences that carry a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or a monetary penalty.
Art. 11
Commission by 
omission
1 A felony or misdemeanour may also be committed by a failure to 
comply with a duty to act.
2 A person fails to comply with a duty to act if he does not prevent a 
legal interest protected under criminal law from being exposed to 
danger or from being harmed even though, due to his legal position, 
he has a duty to do so, in particular on the basis of:
a.	the law;
b.	a contract;
c.	a risk-bearing community entered into voluntarily; or
d.	the creation of a risk.
3 Any person who fails to comply with a duty to act shall be liable to 
prosecution only if, on the basis of the elements of the offence con-
cerned, his conduct is, in the circumstances, as culpable as it would 
have been had he actively committed the offence.
4 The court may reduce the sentence.
Art. 12
2. Intention and 
negligence
Definitions
1 Unless the law expressly provides otherwise, a person is only liable 
to prosecution for a felony or misdemeanour if he commits it wilfully.
2 A person commits a felony or misdemeanour wilfully if he carries 
out the act in the knowledge of what he is doing and in accordance 
with his will. A person acts wilfully as soon as he regards the realisa-
tion of the act as being possible and accepts this.
3 A person commits a felony or misdemeanour through negligence if 
he fails to consider or disregards the consequences of his conduct due 
to a culpable lack of care. A lack of care is culpable if the person fails 
to exercise the care that is incumbent on him in the circumstances and 
commensurate with his personal capabilities.
Art. 13
Error of fact
1 If the person concerned acts under an erroneous belief as to the 
circumstances, the court shall judge the act according to the circum-
stances as the offender believed them to be.
2 If the person concerned could have avoided the error had he exer-
cised due care, he shall be liable to prosecution for his negligent act 
provided the negligent commission of the act is an offence.
Art. 14
3. Lawful acts 
and guilt
Act permitted by 
law
Any person who acts as required or permitted by the law, acts lawfully 
even if the act carries a penalty under this Code or another Act.

Art. 15
Legitimate self-
defence
If any person is unlawfully attacked or threatened with imminent 
attack, the person attacked and any other person are entitled to ward 
off the attack by means that are reasonable in the circumstances.
Art. 16
Mitigatory self-
defence
1 If a person in defending himself exceeds the limits of self-defence as 
defined in Article 15 and in doing so commits an offence, the court 
shall reduce the sentence.
2 If a person in defending himself exceeds the limits of self-defence as 
a result of excusable excitement or panic in reaction to the attack, he 
does not commit an offence.
Art. 17
Legitimate act in 
a situation of 
necessity
Any person who carries out an act that carries a criminal penalty in 
order to save a legal interest of his own or of another from immediate 
and not otherwise avertable danger, acts lawfully if by doing so he 
safeguards interests of higher value.
Art. 18
Mitigatory act in 
a situation of 
necessity
1 Any person who carries out an act that carries a criminal penalty in 
order to save himself or another from immediate and not otherwise 
avertable danger to life or limb, freedom, honour, property or other 
interests of high value shall receive a reduced penalty if he could 
reasonably have been expected to abandon the endangered interest.
2 If the person concerned could not have been reasonably expected to 
abandon the endangered interest, he does not commit an offence.
Art. 19
Absence of legal 
responsibility 
due to a mental 
disorder and 
diminished 
responsibility
1 If the person concerned was unable at the time of the act to appreci-
ate that his act was wrong or to act in accordance with this apprecia-
tion of the act, he is not liable to a penalty.
2 If the person concerned was only partially able at the time of the act 
to appreciate that his act was wrong or to act in accordance with this 
appreciation of the act, the court shall reduce the sentence.
3 Measures in accordance with Articles 59-61, 63, 64, 67, 67b and 67e 
may, however, be taken. 
4 If it was possible for the person concerned to avoid his state of 
mental incapacity or diminished responsibility and had he done so to 
foresee the act that may be committed in that state, paragraphs 1-3 do 
not apply.
Art. 20
Doubt as to legal 
responsibility 
If there are serious grounds for believing that the accused may not be 
legally responsible due to a mental disorder, the investigating authori-
ty or the court shall order a specialist report from an expert.
Art. 21
Error as to 
unlawfulness
Any person who is not and cannot be aware that, by carrying out an 
act, he is acting unlawfully, does not commit an offence. If the error 
was avoidable, the court shall reduce the sentence.
Art. 22
4. Attempts
Criminal liability 
for attempts
1 If, having embarked on committing a felony or misdemeanour, the 
offender does not complete the criminal act or if the result required to 
complete the act is not or cannot be achieved, the court may reduce 
the penalty.
2 If the offender fails to recognise through a serious lack of judgement 
that the act cannot under any circumstances be completed due to the 
nature of the objective or the means used to achieve it, no penalty is 
imposed.
Art. 23
Withdrawal and 
active repentance
1 If the person concerned of his own accord does not complete the 
criminal act or if he assists in preventing the completion of the act, the 
court may reduce the sentence or waive any penalty.
2 If two or more persons carry out or participate in a criminal act, the 
court may reduce the sentence or waive any penalty in respect of any 
person concerned who, of his own accord, assists in preventing the 
completion of the act.
3 The court may also reduce the sentence or waive any penalty in 
respect of a person who withdraws from carrying out or participating 
in a criminal act if the withdrawal of the person concerned would have 
prevented the completion of the act had it not remained uncompleted 
for other reasons.
4 If one or more of the persons carrying out or participating in a crimi-
nal act makes a serious effort to prevent the completion of the act, the 
court may reduce the sentence or waive any penalty if an offence is 
committed irrespective of the efforts of that person or persons.
Art. 24
5. Participation
Incitement
1 Any person who has wilfully incited another to commit a felony or a 
misdemeanour, provided the offence is committed, incurs the same 
penalty as applies to the person who has committed the offence.
2 Any person who attempts to incite someone to commit a felony 
incurs the penalty applicable to an attempt to commit that felony.
Art. 25
Complicity
Any person who wilfully assists another to commit a felony or a 
misdemeanour shall be liable to a reduced penalty.
Art. 26
Participation in a 
special offence
If criminal liability is established or increased by a special obligation 
on the part of the offender, a participant shall be liable to a reduced 
penalty.
Art. 27
Personal 
circumstances
Special personal conditions, characteristics and circumstances that 
increase, reduce or exclude criminal liability are taken into account in 
the case offenders or participants to which they apply.
Art. 28
6. Criminal 
liability of the 
media
1 If an offence is committed and completed through publication in a 
medium, then, subject to the following provisions, only the author 
shall be liable to prosecution.
2 If the author cannot be identified or if he cannot be brought to court 
in Switzerland, then the editor responsible in accordance with Article 
322bis shall be liable to prosecution. If there is no responsible editor, 
then the person responsible for publication in accordance with Article 
322bis shall be liable for prosecution.
3 If the publication has taken place without the knowledge or against 
the will of the author, then the editor or, in his absence, the person 
responsible for publication shall be liable to prosecution as the offend-
er.
4 The accurate reporting of public talks and official communications 
from a public authority may not be made subject to prosecution.
Art. 28a
Protection of 
sources
1 If persons who are professionally involved in the publication of 
information in the editorial section of a periodical medium or their 
auxiliary personnel refuse to give evidence as to the identity of the 
author or as to the content and sources of their information, they are 
not liable to any penalty nor to any procedural law enforcement 
measures.
2 Paragraph 1 does not apply if the court  holds that:
a.	the evidence is required in order to save a person from imme-
diate danger to life or limb; or
b. 	without the evidence, a case of homicide under Articles 111-
113 or a different felony that carries a minimum custodial sen-
tence of three years, or an offence under Articles 187, 189-191, 
197 paragraph 4, 260ter, 260quinquies, 260sexies,305bis, 305ter or 
322ter-322septies of this Code or under Article 19 paragraph 2 of 
the Narcotics Act of 3 October 1951  will not be solved or the 
persons suspected of committing the said offence may not be 
apprehended.
Art. 29
7. Agency 
relationships
A special obligation, the violation of which establishes or increases 
criminal liability, and which is incumbent only on the legal entity, the 
company or the sole proprietorship , is attributed to a natural person, 
if that person acts:
a.	as a governing officer or as a member of a governing officer 
of a legal entity;
b.	as a partner;
c.	as an employee with independent decision-making authority in 
his field of activity within a legal entity, a company or a sole 
proprietorship ; or
d.	without being a governing officer, member of a governing of-
ficer, partner or employee, as the de facto manager.
Art. 30
8. Criminal 
complaint
Right to file a 
complaint
1 If an act shall be liable to prosecution only if a complaint is filed, 
any person who suffers harm due to the act may request that the per-
son responsible be prosecuted.
2 If the person suffering harm does not have the legal capacity to act, 
his legal representative is entitled to file a complaint. If he is under 
guardianship or subject to a general deputyship, the adult protection 
authority is also entitled to file a complaint. 
3 If the person suffering harm is a minor or if he is subject to a general 
deputyship, he is entitled to file a complaint if he is capable of judge-
ment. 
4 If the person suffering harm dies without filing the criminal com-
plaint or without expressly waiving his right to file the criminal com-
plaint, his next of kin are entitled to file the complaint.
5 If an entitled person expressly waives his right to file a complaint, 
his waiver is final.
Art. 31
Time limit for 
filing a com-
plaint
The right to file a complaint expires after three months. The period 
begins on the day that the person entitled to file a complaint discovers 
the identity of suspect.
Art. 32
Indivisibility
If an entitled person files a complaint against one person who partici-
pated in the act, all the participants become liable to prosecution.
Art. 33
Withdrawal of a 
complaint
1 The person entitled to file a complaint may withdraw the complaint at 
any time before notice is given of the judgment of the second cantonal 
instance.
2 Any person who has withdrawn his complaint may not file it again.
3 If the entitled person withdraws his complaint against one suspect, 
the withdrawal applies to all suspects.
4 If a suspect objects to the withdrawal of the complaint against him, 
the withdrawal does not apply to him.

Title Three: Sentences and Measures
Chapter One: Sentences
Section One: Monetary Penalties and Custodial Sentences 
Art. 34
1. Monetary 
penalty
Assessment
1 Unless the law provides otherwise, a monetary penalty amounts to a 
minimum of three and a maximum of 180 daily penalty units.  The 
court decides on the number according to the culpability of the of-
fender.
2 A daily penalty unit normally amounts to a minimum of 30 francs 
and a maximum of 3000 francs.  The court may reduce the value of 
the daily penalty unit to 10 francs if the offender's personal or finan-
cial circumstances so require.  It may decide on a value in excess of 
the maximum value of the daily penalty unit if the law so permits. It 
decides on the value of the daily penalty unit according to the personal 
and financial circumstances of the offender at the time of conviction, 
and in particular according to his income and capital, living expenses, 
any maintenance or support obligations and the minimum subsistence 
level. 
3 The authorities of the Confederation, the cantons and the communes 
shall provide the information required to determine the daily penalty 
unit.
4 The number and value of the daily penalty units must be stated in the 
judgment.
Art. 35
Execution
1 The executive authority shall specify that the offender make payment 
within a period of between one and six months.  It may stipulate 
payment by instalments and on request may extend the period al-
lowed. 
2 If there is justified suspicion that the offender will fail to pay the 
monetary penalty, the executive authority may request immediate 
payment or the provision of security.
3 If the offender fails to pay the monetary penalty within the specified 
period, the executive authority shall instruct the debt collection pro-
ceedings provided their success is expected.
Art. 36
Alternative 
custodial 
sentence
1 In the event that the offender fails to pay the monetary penalty and it 
is not recoverable through debt collection procedures (Art. 35 para. 3), 
the offender shall serve a custodial sentence as the alternative to the 
monetary penalty. A daily penalty unit corresponds to one day in 
custody. The retrospective payment of the monetary penalty leads to a 
corresponding reduction in the alternative custodial sentence.
2 If the monetary penalty has been imposed by an administrative 
authority, the court decides on the alternative custodial sentence.
3-5 ... 
Art. 37-39 
2. ...

Art. 40 
3. Custodial 
sentence
Term
1 The minimum term of a custodial sentence is three days; a shorter 
custodial sentence in lieu of an unpaid monetary penalty (Art. 36) or 
fine (Art. 106) is reserved.
2 The maximum term of a custodial sentence is 20 years. Where the 
law expressly provides, the custodial sentence is for life
Art. 41 
Custodial 
sentence instead 
of a monetary 
penalty
1 The court may impose a custodial sentence instead of a monetary 
penalty if:
a.	a custodial sentence appears appropriate in order to prevent 
the offender from committing further felonies or misdemean-
ours; or
b.	it is anticipated that it will not be possible to enforce a mone-
tary penalty.
2 The court must explain why it has decided to impose a custodial 
sentence.
3 The right is reserved to impose a custodial sentence instead of an 
unpaid monetary penalty (Art. 36).

Section Two: 
Suspended and Partially Suspended Sentences
Art. 42
1. Suspended 
sentences
1 The court shall normally suspend the execution of a monetary penal-
ty or a custodial sentence of no more than two years unless an unsus-
pended sentence appears to be necessary in order to prevent the of-
fender from committing further felonies or misdemeanours. 
2 If the offender received a suspended or unsuspended custodial sen-
tence of more than six months within the five years prior to the of-
fence, the sentence may only be suspended where the circumstances 
are especially favourable. 
3 The suspension of the execution of a sentence may also be refused if 
the offender has failed to make a reasonable effort to compensate for 
any loss or damage he may have caused.
4 A suspended sentence may be combined with a fine in accordance 
with Article 106. 
Art. 43
2. Partially 
suspended 
custodial 
sentences 
1 The court may partially suspend the execution of a custodial sen-
tence of at least one year and no more than three years if this is neces-
sary in order to take sufficient account of the culpability of the offend-
er. 
2 The part of the sentence that must be executed immediately may not 
exceed one half of the sentence.
3 Both the suspended and the unsuspended part must amount to at 
least six months.  The provisions on the granting of parole (Art. 86) 
do not apply to the unsuspended part of the sentence.
Art. 44
3. General 
provisions
Probationary 
period
1 If the court suspends the execution of a sentence in full or in part, it 
shall make the offender subject to a probationary period of from two 
to five years.
2 The court may order probation assistance and impose conduct orders 
for the duration of the probationary period.
3 The court shall explain the importance and the consequences of the 
suspended and partially suspended sentence to the offender.
4 The probationary period begins on notification of the judgment that 
is enforceable. 
Art. 45
Successful 
completion of 
probation
If the offender is of good conduct until the expiry of the probationary 
period, the postponed sentence is not executed.
Art. 46
Breach of 
probation
1 If the offender commits a felony or misdemeanour during the proba-
tionary period and if it therefore must be expected that he will commit 
further offences, the court shall revoke the suspended sentence or the 
suspended part of the sentence. If the revoked sentence and the new 
sentence are of the same type, they shall form a cumulative sentence 
in analogous application of Article 49. 
2 If it is not expected that the offender will commit further offences, 
the court shall not revoke the suspended sentence. It may admonish 
the offender or extend the probationary period by up to one half of the 
duration specified in the judgment. The court may order probation 
assistance and impose conduct orders for the duration of the extended 
probationary period. If the extension begins after the expiry of the 
probationary period, the extended period begins on the day that it is 
ordered.
3 The court that judges the new felony or misdemeanour also decides 
on revocation.
4 If the offender fails to attend for probation assistance or disregards 
the conduct orders, Article 95 paragraphs 3-5 apply.
5 Revocation may no longer be ordered if three years have elapsed 
since the expiry of the probationary period.

Section Three: Determination of the Sentence
Art. 47
1. Principle
1 The court determines the sentence according to the culpability of the 
offender. It takes account of the previous conduct and the personal 
circumstances of the offender as well as the effect that the sentence 
will have on his life.
2 Culpability is assessed according to the seriousness of the damage or 
danger to the legal interest concerned, the reprehensibility of the 
conduct, the offender's motives and aims, and the extent to which the 
offender, in view of the personal and external circumstances, could 
have avoided causing the danger or damage.
Art. 48
2. Mitigation of 
the sentence
Grounds
The court shall reduce the sentence if:
a.	the offender acted:
1.	for honourable motives,
2.	while in serious distress,
3.	while of the view that he was under serious threat,
4.	at the behest of a person whom he was duty bound to 
obey or on whom he was dependent;
b.	the offender was seriously provoked by the conduct of the per-
son suffering injury;
c.	the offender acted in a state of extreme emotion that was ex-
cusable in the circumstances or while under serious psycho-
logical stress;
d.	the offender has shown genuine remorse, and in particular has 
made reparation for the injury, damage or loss caused, insofar 
as this may reasonably be expected of him;
e.	the need for punishment has been substantially reduced due to 
the time that has elapsed since the offence and the offender 
has been of good conduct in this period. 
Art. 48a
Effect
1 If the court chooses to reduce the sentence, it is not bound by the 
minimum penalty that the offence carries.
2 The court may impose a different form of penalty from that which 
the offence carries, but remains bound by the statutory maximum and 
minimum levels for that form of penalty.
Art. 49
3. Concurrent 
sentencing
1 If the offender, by committing one or more offences, has fulfilled the 
requirements for two or more penalties of the same form, the court 
shall impose the sentence for the most serious offence at an appropri-
ately increased level. It may not, however, increase the maximum 
level of the sentence by more than half, and it is bound by the statuto-
ry maximum for that form of penalty.
2 If the court must pass sentence on an offence that the offender com-
mitted before he was sentenced for a different offence, it shall deter-
mine the supplementary penalty so that the offender is not more se-
verely punished than he would have been had the sentences been 
imposed at the same time.
3 If the offender committed one or more offences before reaching the 
age of 18, the court shall determine the cumulative sentence in ac-
cordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 such that it is not more severe than 
it would have been had sentences been imposed separately.
Art. 50
4. Obligation to 
justify
Where a judgment must be justified, the court shall also specify the 
circumstances taken into account in determining the sentence and their 
weighting. 
Art. 51
5. Taking 
account of time 
spend on remand
When determining the sentence, the court shall take account of any 
time spent on remand that the offender has served in respect of the 
proceedings in question or any other proceedings. One day in deten-
tion corresponds to one daily penalty unit of a monetary penalty. 

Section Four: 
Exemption from Punishment and the Suspension and 
Abandonment of Proceedings 
Art. 52
1. Grounds for 
exemption from 
punishment
No need for a 
penalty 
The competent authority shall refrain from prosecuting the offender, 
bringing him to court or punishing him if the level of culpability and 
consequences of the offence are negligible.
Art. 53 
Reparation
If the offender has made reparation for the loss, damage or injury or 
made every reasonable effort to right the wrong that he has caused, the 
competent authority shall refrain from prosecuting him, bringing him 
to court or punishing him if:
a.	a suspended custodial sentence not exceeding one year, a sus-
pended monetary penalty or a fine are suitable as a penalty;
b.	the interest in prosecution of the general public and of the per-
sons harmed are negligible; and
c.	the offender has admitted the offence.
Art. 54
Effect on the 
offender of his 
act
If the offender is so seriously affected by the immediate consequences 
of his act that a penalty would be inappropriate, the responsible au-
thorities shall refrain from prosecuting him, bringing him to court or 
punishing him. 
Art. 55
2. General 
provisions
1 The court shall refrain from revoking a suspended sentence and in 
the case of the parole from a recall if the requirements for an exemp-
tion from punishment are met.
2 The cantons designate the bodies responsible for the administration 
of criminal justice as the competent authorities under Articles 52, 53 
and 54.
Art. 55a 
3. Suspension 
and abandonmen
t of proceedings.
Spouse, regis-
tered partner or 
life partner as 
victim 
1 In a case of common assault (Art. 123 no 2 para. 3-5), repeated acts 
of aggression (Art. 126 para. 2 let. b, bbis and c), threatening behaviour 
(Art. 180 para. 2) and coercion (Art. 181), the public prosecutor or the 
court may suspend the proceedings if: 
a. 	the victim:
1.	is the spouse of the offender and the offence was commit-
ted during the marriage or within a year of divorce, or
2.	is the registered partner of the offender and the offence 
was committed during the registered partnership or with-
in a year of its dissolution, or
3.	is the hetero- or homosexual partner of the offender or the 
ex-partner of the offender if they have been separated for 
less than a year; and
b. 	the victim or, if he or she lacks legal capacity, his or her legal 
representative requests this to be done; and
c. 	suspension appears appropriate in order to stabilise or improve 
the victim's situation.
2 The public prosecutor or the court may during the period of suspen-
sion require the accused to attend a course on violence prevention. 
The public prosecutor or the court shall notify the authority or organi-
sation competent under cantonal law for matters relating to domestic 
violence about the measures taken. 
3 Suspension is not permitted if:
a.	the accused has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanour 
against life and limb, against liberty, or against sexual integri-
ty;
b.	he or she has received a sentence or been made subject to a 
measure; and
c.	the victim of the offence is a person listed in paragraph 1 let-
ter a. 
4 Suspension is limited to six months. The public prosecutor or the 
court shall resume the proceedings if the victim or, if he or she lacks 
legal capacity, his or her legal representative requests this to be done 
or it transpires that the suspension has neither stabilised nor improved 
the victim's situation. 
5 Before the suspension ends, the public prosecutor or the court shall 
conduct an assessment. If the victim's situation has stabilised or 
improved, it shall order the abandonment of the proceedings. 

Chapter Two: Measures
Section One:  
Therapeutic Measures and Indefinite Incarceration
Art. 56
1. Principles
1 A measure is ordered if:
a.	a penalty alone is not sufficient to counter the risk of further 
offending by the offender;
b.	the offender requires treatment or treatment is required in the 
interest of public safety; and
c.	the requirements of Articles 59-61, 63 or 64 are fulfilled.
2 The ordering of a measure requires that the related intervention in 
the personal rights of the offender is not unreasonable in view of the 
probability and seriousness of additional offences.
3 In ordering a measure under Articles 59-61, 63 and 64 and in modi-
fying the sanction in accordance with Article 65, the court shall base 
its decision on an expert assessment. This shall provide an opinion on:
a.	the necessity and the prospects of success of any treatment of 
the offender;
b.	the nature and the probability of possible additional offences; 
and
c.	the ways in which the measure may be implemented.
4 If the offender has committed an offence in terms of Article 64 
paragraph 1, the assessment must be conducted by an expert who has 
neither treated the offender before nor been responsible in any other 
way for his care.
4bis If consideration is given to ordering lifelong incarceration in 
accordance with Article 64 paragraph 1bis, the court shall base its 
decision on reports from at least two experienced specialists who are 
independent of each other and who have neither treated the offender 
nor been responsible in any other way for his care. 
5 Normally the court only orders a measure if a suitable institution is 
available.
6 Where the requirements for a measure are no longer fulfilled, it is 
revoked.
Art. 56a
Concurrent 
measures
1 If two or more measures are equally suitable but only one is neces-
sary, the court shall order the measure that is more convenient for the 
offender.
2 If two or more measures are necessary, the court may order these 
concurrently.
Art. 57
Relationship 
between 
measures and 
penalties
1 If the requirements for both a penalty and a measure are fulfilled, the 
court shall order both sanctions.
2 The implementation of a measure under Articles 59-61 takes prece-
dence over a custodial sentence that is imposed at the same time or 
which is executed through revocation of a suspended sentence or 
recall to custody. Likewise, the reactivation of the execution of a 
measure in accordance with Article 62a takes precedence over a 
cumulative sentence imposed at the same time.
3 The deprivation of liberty associated with the measure must be taken 
into account in determining the penalty.
Art. 58
Implementation
1 ... 
2 The therapeutic institutions in terms of Articles 59-61 must be 
managed separately from penal institutions.
Art. 59
2. In-patient 
therapeutic 
measures
Treatment of 
mental disorders
1 If the offender is suffering from a serious mental disorder, the court 
may order in-patient treatment if:
a.	the offender's mental disorder was a factor in a felony or mis-
demeanour that he committed; and
b.	it is expected that the measure will reduce the risk of further 
offences being committed in which his mental disorder is a 
factor.
2 The in-patient treatment is carried out in an appropriate psychiatric 
institution or therapeutic institution.
3 If there is a risk of the offender absconding or committing further 
offences, he shall be treated in a secure institution. He may also be 
treated in a penal institution in accordance with Article 76 paragraph 
2, provided it is guaranteed that the required therapeutic treatment can 
be provided by specialist staff. 
4 The deprivation of liberty associated with in-patient treatment nor-
mally amounts to a maximum of five years. If the requirements for 
parole have not yet been fulfilled after five years and if it is expected 
that the measure will reduce the risk of further felonies or misdemean-
ours being committed in which his mental disorder is a factor, the 
court may at the request of the executive authority order the extension 
of the measure for a maximum of five years in any case.
Art. 60
Treatment of 
addiction
1 If the offender is dependent on addictive substances or in any other 
way dependent, the court may order in-patient treatment if:
a.	the offender's dependence was a factor in the felony or mis-
demeanour that he committed; and
b.	it is expected that treatment will reduce the risk of further of-
fences being committed in which his dependence is a factor.
2 The court shall take account of the offender's request for and readi-
ness to undergo treatment.
3 The treatment is carried out in a specialised institution or, if neces-
sary, in a psychiatric hospital. It must be adjusted to the special needs 
of the offender and the state of his health.
4 The deprivation of liberty associated with in-patient treatment shall 
normally amount to a maximum of three years. If the requirements for 
parole have not yet been fulfilled after three years and if it is expected 
that the measure will reduce the risk of further felonies or misdemean-
ours being committed in which his dependence is a factor, the court 
may at the request of the executive authority on one occasion only 
order the extension of the measure for a maximum of one further year. 
In the event of an extension and the recall to custody following parole, 
the deprivation of liberty associated with the measure may not exceed 
a maximum of six years.
Art. 61
Measures for 
young adults
1 If the offender was under 25 years of age at the time of the offence 
and if he is suffering from a serious developmental disorder, the court 
may commit him to an institution for young adults if:
a.	the offender's developmental disorder was a factor in the felo-
ny or misdemeanour that he committed; and
b.	it is expected that the measure will reduce the risk of further 
offences being committed in which his developmental disorder 
is a factor.
2 Institutions for young adults must be managed separately from other 
institutions and facilities under this Code.
3 The offender should be taught the skills needed to live independently 
and without further offending. In particular, he should be encouraged 
to undergo basic and advanced vocational and professional training.
4 The deprivation of liberty associated with the measure amounts to a 
maximum of four years. In the event of the recall to custody following 
release on parole, it may not exceed a maximum of six years. The 
measure must be revoked when the offender reaches the age of 30.
5 If the offender was convicted of an offence committed before he was 
18 years of age, the measure may be implemented in an institution for 
minors. 
Art. 62
Parole
1 The offender is released on parole from undergoing an in-patient 
measure as soon as his condition justifies his being given the liberty to 
prove himself.
2 In the case of release on parole from a measure under Article 59, the 
probationary period amounts to one to five years, and in the case of 
release on parole from a measure under Articles 60 and 61, from one 
to three years.
3 The person released on parole may be required to undergo out-
patient treatment during the probationary period. The executive au-
thority may order probation assistance and issue conduct orders for the 
duration the probationary period.
4 If on expiry of the probationary period, a continuation of the out-
patient treatment, the probation assistance or the conduct orders is 
considered necessary in order to reduce the risk of further felonies and 
misdemeanours being committed that are associated with the condi-
tion of the person released on parole, the court may at the request of 
the executive authority extend the probationary period as follows:
a.	by one to five years in the case of release on parole from a 
measure in accordance with Article 59;
b.	by one to three years in the case of release on parole from a 
measure under Articles 60 and 61.
5 The probationary period following release on parole from a measure 
under Articles 60 and 61 may not exceed six years.
6 If the offender has committed an offence in terms of Article 64 
paragraph 1, the probationary period may be extended as often as is 
considered necessary to prevent further such offences being commit-
ted.
Art. 62a
Breach of 
probation
1 If a person released on parole commits an offence during the proba-
tionary period and thus demonstrates that the risk that the measure was 
intended to reduce is still present, the court assessing the new offence 
may, after consulting the executive authority:
a.	order his recall to custody;
b.	revoke the measure and, provided the relevant requirements 
are fulfilled, order a new measure; or
c.	revoke the measure and, provided the relevant requirements 
are fulfilled, order the execution of a custodial sentence.
2 If as a result of the new offence the requirements for an unsuspended 
custodial sentence are fulfilled and if this sentence runs concurrently 
with a custodial sentence that has been suspended to give precedence 
to the measure, the court shall impose a cumulative sentence in appli-
cation of Article 49.
3 If as a result of the conduct of the person released on parole during 
the probationary period there is a serious expectation that he could 
commit an offence in terms of Article 64 paragraph 1, the court that 
ordered the measure may, at the request of the executive authority, 
order a recall to custody.
4 For a measure under Article 59, the recall to custody is for a maxi-
mum period of five years, and for measures under Articles 60 and 61 
for a maximum period of two years.
5 If the court decides against a recall to custody or a new measure, it 
may:
a.	admonish the person released on parole;
b.	order out-patient treatment or probation assistance;
c.	impose conduct orders on the person released on parole; and
d.	extend the probationary period by from one to five years in the 
case of a measure under Article 59, and by from one to three 
years in the case of a measure under Articles 60 and 61.
6 If the person released on parole fails to comply with the terms of 
probation assistance or disregards the conduct orders, Article 95 
paragraphs 3-5 applies.
Art. 62b
Final release
1 If the person released on parole successfully completes the proba-
tionary period, he is granted final release.
2 The offender is granted final release if the maximum duration of a 
measure under Articles 60 and 61 is reached and the requirements for 
the parole apply.
3 If deprivation of liberty associated with the measure is for a shorter 
period than the suspended custodial sentence, the remainder of the 
sentence is not executed.
Art. 62c
Termination of a 
measure
1 A measure is terminated, if:
a.	its implementation or continuation appears to have no prospect 
of success; 
b.	the maximum duration under Articles 60 and 61 has been 
reached and the requirements for the parole do not apply; or
c.	a suitable institution does not exist or no longer exists.
2 If the deprivation of liberty associated with the measure is for a 
shorter period than the suspended custodial sentence, the remainder of 
the sentence is executed. If the requirements for parole or a suspended 
custodial sentence apply in relation to the remainder of the sentence, 
execution of the sentence is suspended.
3 Instead of ordering the execution of the sentence, the court may 
order another measure if it is to be expected that such a measure will 
reduce the risk of the offender committing further felonies and mis-
demeanours in which his condition is a factor.
4 If there is a serious expectation that if a measure ordered in respect 
of an offence in terms of Article 64 paragraph 1 is terminated, the 
offender will commit further such offences, the court may at the 
request of the executive authority order his indefinite incarceration.
5 If the competent authority regards an adult protection measure to be 
appropriate on the termination of the measure, it shall inform the adult 
protection authority of this. 
6 Furthermore, the court may terminate an in-patient therapeutic 
measure before or during its implementation and order another in-
patient therapeutic measure in its place if it is expected that the new 
measure has a significantly better chance of reducing the risk of the 
offender committing further felonies and misdemeanours in which his 
condition is a factor.
Art. 62d
Consideration of 
release and the 
termination of 
measures
1 The competent authority shall on request or ex officio consider 
whether and when the offender should be released on parole from the 
implementation of the measure or whether the measure should be 
terminated. It makes a decision on such matters at least once each 
year. It shall first grant a hearing to the offender and obtain a report 
from the governing body of the relevant institution.
2 If the offender committed an offence in terms of Article 64 para-
graph 1, the competent authority shall reach its decision on the basis 
of the expert opinion of an independent specialist and after hearing a 
committee comprising representatives of the prosecution services, the 
execution authorities and one or more psychiatrists. The specialists 
and psychiatrists concerned must not be those responsible for the 
treatment or care of the offender.
Art. 63
3. Out-patient 
treatment
Requirements 
and implementa-
tion
1 If the offender is suffering from a serious mental disorder or if he is 
dependent on addictive substances or in any other way, the court may 
order that he receive out-patient rather than in-patient treatment if:
a.	the offender commits an offence in which his condition is a 
factor; and
b.	it is expected that the measure will reduce the risk of further 
offences being committed in which his condition is a factor.
2 The court may defer the execution of an unsuspended custodial 
sentence imposed at the same time, a suspended custodial sentence 
due for execution following revocation of suspension and the remain-
der of a sentence due for execution following a recall to custody to 
give precedence to out-patient treatment in order to take account of the 
form of the treatment. It may order probation assistance and issue 
conduct orders for the duration the treatment.
3 The competent authority may order the offender to be treated tempo-
rarily as an in-patient if this is required in order to initiate the out-
patient treatment. The period of in-patient treatment may not exceed 
two months.
4 The period of out-patient treatment may not normally exceed five 
years. If the continuation of the out-patient treatment is considered 
necessary at the end of the five-year period in order to reduce the risk 
of further felonies and misdemeanours in which a mental disorder is a 
factor, the court may at the request of the executive authority continue 
the treatment for a further period of from one to five years.
Art. 63a
Termination of 
the measure
1 The competent authority shall assess at least once each year whether 
the out-patient treatment should be continued or terminated. It shall 
first grant a hearing to the offender and obtain a report from the thera-
pists.
2 The out-patient treatment is terminated by the competent authority if:
a.	it has been successfully completed;
b.	its continuation appears to have no prospect of success; or
c.	the statutory maximum duration for the treatment of an alco-
hol, drug or therapeutic product dependent person has been 
reached.
3 If the offender commits a further offence during the out-patient 
treatment and thus demonstrates that this form of treatment will prob-
ably be unsuccessful in averting the risk offences being committed in 
which the condition of the offender is a factor, the unsuccessful treat-
ment shall be terminated by order of the court assessing the new 
offence.
4 If the offender fails to comply with the conditions of probation 
assistance or if he disregards the conduct orders, Article 95 paragraphs 
3-5 applies.
Art. 63b
Execution of the 
suspended 
custodial 
sentence
1 If the out-patient treatment has been successfully completed, the 
suspended custodial sentence is not executed.
2 If out-patient treatment is terminated due to there being no prospect 
of success (Art. 63a para. 2 let. b), the statutory maximum duration 
being reached (Art. 63a para. 2 let. c) or its being unsuccessful (Art. 
63a para. 3), the suspended custodial sentence is executed.
3 If out-patient treatment conducted while the offender is at liberty is 
considered a risk to third parties, the suspended custodial sentence is 
executed and the out-patient treatment continued while the custodial 
sentence is being served.
4 The court decides on the extent to which the deprivation of liberty 
associated with the out-patient treatment is taken into account in 
determining the custodial sentence. If the requirements for parole or a 
suspended custodial sentence apply in relation to the remainder of the 
sentence, execution of the sentence is suspended.
5 Instead of the execution of the sentence the court may order an in-
patient therapeutic measure under Articles 59-61 if it is to be expected 
that this will reduce the risk of the offender committing further felo-
nies or misdemeanours in which his condition is a factor.
Art. 64
4. Indefinite 
incarceration
Requirements 
and execution
1 The court shall order indefinite incarceration if the offender has 
committed murder, intentional homicide, serious assault, rape, rob-
bery, hostage taking, arson, endangering life or another offence that 
carries a maximum sentence of five or more years by which he has 
caused or intended to cause serious detriment to the physical, psycho-
logical or sexual integrity of another person, and if: 
a.	due to the personality traits of the offender, the circumstances 
of the offence and his general personal circumstances, it is se-
riously expected that he will commit further offences of the 
same type; or
b.	due to a permanent or long-term mental disorder of considera-
ble gravity that was a factor in the offence, it is seriously ex-
pected that the offender will commit further offences of the 
same type and the ordering of a measure in accordance with 
Article 59 does not promise any success.
1bis The court shall order lifelong incarceration if the offender has 
committed murder, intentional homicide, serious assault, robbery, 
rape, indecent assault, false imprisonment or abduction, hostage-
taking, enforced disappearance of persons, trafficking in human be-
ings, genocide, or a felony under the heading of crimes against hu-
manity or war crimes (Title Twelve) and if the following requirements 
are met: 
a.	the offender, by committing the offence, caused or intended to 
cause serious detriment to the physical, psychological or sexu-
al integrity of another person.
b.	There is a high probability that the offender will commit one 
of these felonies again.
c.	The offender is assessed as being permanently untreatable, as 
the treatment offers no long-term prospect of success. 
2 The execution of the custodial sentence takes priority over indefinite 
incarceration. The provisions on parole in relation to the custodial 
sentence (Art. 86-88) do not apply. 
3 If during the execution of the custodial sentence, it is expected that 
the offender will prove to be of good behaviour when at liberty, the 
court shall order parole from the custodial sentence at the earliest from 
the time when the offender has served two thirds of a specific custodi-
al sentence or 15 years of a life sentence. The court that ordered 
indefinite incarceration is responsible for the decision on parole. In 
addition, Article 64a applies. 
4 Indefinite incarceration is executed in a therapeutic institution or in a 
penal institution in accordance with Article 76 paragraph 2. Public 
safety must be guaranteed. The offender receives psychiatric care if 
this is necessary.
Art. 64a
Revocation and 
release
1 The offender is released on parole from indefinite incarceration in 
accordance with Article 64 paragraph 1 as soon as it is expected that 
he will be of good behaviour when at liberty.  The probationary 
period amounts to two to five years. For the duration of the probation-
ary period, probation assistance may be ordered and conduct orders 
may be imposed.
2 If on expiry of the probationary period a continuation of the proba-
tion assistance or the conduct orders is considered to be necessary in 
order to reduce the risk of further offences in terms of Article 64 
paragraph 1, the court may at the request of the executive authority 
extend the probationary period by a further two to five years.
3 If due to his conduct during the probationary period, it is seriously 
expected that the offender may commit further offences in terms of 
Article 64 paragraph 1, the court at the request of the executive au-
thority shall order his recall to custody.
4 If the offender when released on parole fails to comply with the 
conditions of probation assistance or disregards the conduct orders, 
Article 95 paragraphs 3-5 applies.
5 If the offender when released on parole is of good behaviour until 
the expiry of the probationary period, he is granted final release.
Art. 64b 
Consideration of 
release
1 The competent authority shall consider on request or ex officio:
a.	at least once annually, and for the first time after two years 
have lapsed, whether and when the offender may be released 
on parole from indefinite incarceration (Art. 64a para. 1); 
b.	at least every two years, and for the first time before indefinite 
incarceration takes effect, whether the requirements for an in-
patient therapeutic treatment have been fulfilled and whether a 
related application should therefore be made to the competent 
court (Art. 65 para. 1).
2 The competent authority makes its decisions in terms of paragraph 1 
based on: 
a.	a report from the institution board; 
b.	an independent specialist assessment in terms of Article 56 
paragraph 4;
c.	its hearing of a committee in accordance with Article 62d par-
agraph 2;
d.	its hearing of the offender. 
Art. 64c 
Consideration of 
release from 
lifelong incar-
ceration and 
parole
1 In cases of lifelong incarceration under Article 64 paragraph 1bis the 
competent authority shall consider ex officio or on application whether 
there are any new scientific findings that lead to the expectation that 
the offender can be treated so that he will no longer pose a risk to the 
public. It decides on the basis of a report from the Federal Commis-
sion for the Assessment of the Treatability of Offenders subject to 
Lifelong Incarceration.
2 If the competent authority concludes that the offender can be treated, 
it shall offer him the option of treatment. Treatment is carried out in a 
secure institution. Until the order imposing lifelong incarceration has 
been revoked in accordance with paragraph 3, the provisions on the 
execution of lifelong incarceration continue to apply.
3 If the treatment demonstrates that the risk posed by the offender has 
been considerably reduced and may be reduced to the extent that he no 
longer poses a risk to the public, the court shall revoke the order 
imposing lifelong incarceration and order an in-patient therapeutic 
measure in accordance with Articles 59-61 in a secure institution.
4 The court may grant the offender parole from lifelong incarceration 
if he no longer poses a risk to the public due to old age, serious illness 
or on other grounds. Parole is governed by Article 64a.
5 The court that ordered lifelong incarceration is responsible for decid-
ing whether parole should be granted. It bases its decision on reports 
from at least two experienced specialists who are independent of each 
other and who have neither treated the offender nor been responsible 
in any other way for his care.
6 Paragraphs 1 and 2 also apply during the execution of the custodial 
sentence that precedes lifelong incarceration. Lifelong incarceration 
shall be revoked in accordance with paragraph 3 at the earliest when 
the offender has served two thirds of a specific custodial sentence or 
15 years of a life sentence.
Art. 65
5. Modification 
of the sanction
1 If an offender fulfils the requirements for an in-patient therapeutic 
measure in terms of Articles 59-61 before or during the execution of a 
custodial sentence or of indefinite incarceration in accordance with 
Article 64 paragraph 1, the court may order this measure retrospec-
tively.  The competent court is the court that imposed the sentence or 
ordered indefinite incarceration. The execution of any remainder of 
the sentence is deferred.
2 If during the execution of the custodial sentence, new information or 
evidence comes to light to the effect that the requirements for indefi-
nite incarceration are fulfilled and already applied at the time of con-
viction although the court could not have had knowledge of this, the 
court may order indefinite incarceration retrospectively. Jurisdiction 
and procedure are determined by the rules that apply to a review 
(Arts 410415 Criminal Procedure Code ).   

Section Two: Other Measures
Art. 66
1. Good 
behaviour bond
1 If there is the risk that a person will commit a felony or misdemean-
our that he has threatened to commit, or if a person convicted of a 
felony or of a misdemeanour indicates the clear intention to repeat the 
offence, the court may, at the request of the person threatened, obtain 
a promise from the offender that he will not commit the offence and 
require him to deposit appropriate security therefor.
2 If he refuses to make the promise, or fails to deposit the security 
within the specified period, the court may require him to make the 
promise or deposit the security by imposing a period of detention for 
security reasons. The period of detention for security reasons may not 
be for more than two months. It is executed in the same way as a short 
custodial sentence (Art. 79 ).
3 If the offender commits the felony or the misdemeanour within two 
years of depositing the security, the security is forfeited to the State. If 
no offence is committed, the security is returned.
Art. 66a 
1a. Expulsion.
a. Mandatory 
expulsion
1 The court shall expel foreign nationals from Switzerland for a period 
of 5-15 years if they are convicted of any of the following offences, 
irrespective of the sentence imposed:
a.	intentional homicide (Art. 111), murder (Art. 112), man-
slaughter (Art. 113), inciting and assisting suicide (Art. 115), 
illegal abortion (Art. 118 para. 1 and 2);
b. 	serious assault (Art. 122), female genital mutilation (Art. 124 
para. 1), abandonment (Art. 127), endangering life (Art. 129), 
attack (Art. 134), representations of violence (Art. 135 para. 1 
second sentence); 
c. 	aggravated misappropriation (Art. 138 no 2), aggravated theft 
(Art. 139 no 3), robbery (Art. 140), fraud for commercial gain 
(Art. 146 para. 2), computer fraud for commercial gain 
(Art. 147 para. 2), misuse of a cheque card or credit card for 
commercial gain (Art. 148 para. 2), aggravated extortion 
(Art. 156 para. 2-4), profiteering for commercial gain (Art. 
157 no 2), handling stolen goods for commercial gain (Art. 
160 no 2);
d.	theft (Art. 139) in conjunction with unlawful entry (Art. 186);
e.	fraud (Art. 146 para. 1) related to social insurance or social 
assistance, unlawful claims for social insurance or social assis-
tance benefits (Art. 148a para. 1);
f. 	fraud (Art. 146 para. 1), fraud in relation to administrative ser-
vices and charges (Art. 14 para. 1-3 of the Federal Act of 22 
March 1974  on Administrative Criminal Law) or tax fraud, 
misappropriation of taxes deducted at source or any other of-
fence related to public charges that carries a maximum penalty 
of a one-year custodial sentence or more;
g.	forced marriage, forced registered partnership (Art. 181a), 
trafficking in human beings (Art. 182), false imprisonment 
and abduction (Art. 183), aggravated false imprisonment and 
abduction (Art. 184), hostage taking (Art. 185); 
h. 	sexual acts with children (Art. 187 nos 1 and 1bis), sexual acts 
with dependent persons (Art. 188), indecent assault (Art. 189 
paras 2 and 3), rape (Art. 190), sexual acts with persons inca-
pable of proper judgement or resistance (Art. 191), exploita-
tion of a person in a position of need or of dependency 
(Art. 193), deception as to the sexual character of an act 
(Art. 193a), encouraging prostitution (Art. 195), pornography 
(Art. 197 para. 4 second sentence); 
i. 	arson (Art. 221 para. 1 and 2), wilfully causing an explosion 
(Art. 223 para. 1 no 1), misuse of explosives and toxic gases 
with criminal intent (Art. 224 para. 1), wilfully causing danger 
without criminal intent (Art. 225 para. 1), manufacture, con-
cealment and transport of explosives and toxic gases 
(Art. 226), causing danger by means of nuclear energy, radio-
activity and ionising radiation (Art. 226bis), preparatory of-
fences (Art. 226ter), wilfully causing a flood or collapse (Art. 
227 para. 1 no 1), criminal damage to electrical installations, 
and hydraulic or protective structures (Art. 228 no 1 para. 1), 
breach of construction regulations (Art. 229 para. 1), removal 
or non-installation of safety devices (Art. 230 Ziff. 1);
j. 	wilfully causing danger by means of genetically modified or 
pathogenic organisms (Art. 230bis para. 1), transmission of 
human diseases (Art. 231), wilful contamination of drinking 
water (Art. 234 para. 1); 
k. 	disruption of public traffic (Art. 237 no 1);
l. 	acts preparatory to the commission of an offence (Art. 260bis 
para. 1 and 3), participation in or support for a criminal or ter-
rorist organisation (Art. 260ter), endangering public safety with 
weapons (Art. 260quater), financing terrorism (Art. 260quinquies) 
or recruiting, training and travelling with a view to committing 
a terrorist offence (Art. 260sexies);
m..	genocide (Art. 264), felonies against humanity (Art. 264a), 
serious violations of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 
1949  (Art. 264c), other war crimes (Art. 264d-264h);
n. 	wilful violations of Article 116 paragraph 3 or Article 118 
paragraph 3 of the Foreign Nationals Act of 16 December 
2005 ;
o.	violation of Article 19 paragraph 2 or 20 paragraph 2 of the 
Narcotics Act of 3 October 1951  (NarcA);
p. 	violation of Article 74 paragraph 4 of the Intelligence Service 
Act of 25 September 2015  (IntelSA).
2 The court may by way of exception refrain from ordering expulsion 
if it would cause serious personal hardship to the foreign national 
concerned and the public interest in expulsion does not outweigh the 
private interest of the foreign national in remaining in Switzerland. In 
such cases, account must be taken of the special position of foreign 
nationals who were born or have grown up in Switzerland.
3 The court may also refrain from ordering expulsion if the offence 
was committed in justifiable self-defence (Art. 16 para. 1) or in a 
justifiable situation of necessity (Art. 18 para. 1).
Art. 66abis 
b. Non-
mandatory 
expulsion
The court may expel a foreign national from Switzerland for 3-15 
years if he is convicted and sentenced or made subject to a measure 
under Articles 59-61 or 64 for a felony or misdemeanour that is not 
listed in Article 66a.
Art. 66b 
c. Common 
provisions. 
Repeat offence
1 Any person who has been made subject to an expulsion order who 
commits a further offence that meets the requirements for expulsion 
under Article 66a shall be expelled again for 20 years.
2 Lifelong expulsion may be ordered if the offender commits the new 
offence while the previous expulsion order is still in effect.
Art. 66c 
d. Time of 
enforcement
1 The expulsion order applies from the date on which the judgment 
becomes legally enforceable.
2 Before enforcing the expulsion order, any unsuspended sentences or 
parts thereof and any custodial measures must be executed.
3 The expulsion order is enforced as soon as the offender is condition-
ally or finally released from the execution of criminal penalties or 
measures or the custodial measure is revoked, provided that the re-
mainder of sentence need not be executed and no other such measure 
has been ordered.
4 If a person subject to an expulsion order is transferred to his home 
country for the execution of criminal penalties or measures, the expul-
sion order applies on such transfer.
5 The duration of expulsion is calculated from the day on which the 
offender leaves Switzerland.
Art. 66d 
e. Deferring 
enforcement of 
mandatory 
expulsion
1 The enforcement of a mandatory expulsion order under Article 66a 
may only be deferred if: 
a.	the person concerned is recognised by Switzerland as a refu-
gee and, if expelled, his life or his freedom would be endan-
gered due to his race, religion, nationality, affiliation to a spe-
cific social group or his political views; the foregoing does not 
apply to a refugee who may not invoke the ban on refoulement 
under Article 5 paragraph 2 of the Asylum Act of 26 June 
1998 ;
b.	expulsion would violate other mandatory provisions of inter-
national law.
2 In reaching its decision, the competent cantonal authority must 
assume that expulsion to a state deemed safe by the Federal Council in 
accordance with Article 6a paragraph 2 of the Asylum Act of 26 June 
1998 does not violate Article 25 paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Federal 
Constitution.
Art. 67 
2. Prohibition 
from carrying on 
an activity, 
contact prohibi-
tion and 
exclusion order
a. Prohibition 
from carrying on 
an activity, 
requirements
1 If a person has committed a felony or misdemeanour while carrying 
on a professional activity or an organised non-professional activity, 
and has as a result received a custodial sentence in excess of six 
months, and if there is a risk that he will abuse his activity in order to 
commit a further felony or misdemeanour, the court may prohibit him 
totally or partially from carrying on this activity or comparable activi-
ties for a period of six months to five years. 
2 If a person has committed a felony or misdemeanour against a minor 
or another especially vulnerable person and if there is a risk that in 
carrying on a professional activity or an organised non-professional 
activity that involves regular contact with any minors or with other 
especially vulnerable persons he will commit further offences of this 
nature, the court may prohibit him from carrying on the activity con-
cerned for one to ten years.
2bis The court may impose a lifelong prohibition order under para-
graph 2 if is anticipated that the offender will still represent a danger 
after the period of ten years. At the request of the executive authority, 
it may extend a prohibition order that is limited in time in terms of 
paragraph 2 by a maximum of five years on any one occasion if this is 
deemed necessary to prevent the offender from committing further 
felonies and misdemeanours of the type that led to the prohibition 
order.  
3 If a person receives a sentence or is made subject to a measure under 
Articles 59-61, 63 or 64 for any of the following offences, the court 
shall prohibit him for the rest of his life from carrying on any profes-
sional activity or organised non-professional activity that involves 
regular contact with any minors: 
a.	trafficking in human beings (Art. 182) where the offence was 
committed for the purpose of the sexual exploitation of a mi-
nor; 
b.	sexual acts with children (Art. 187), sexual acts with depend-
ent persons (Art. 188) or sexual acts with minors against pay-
ment (Art. 196);
c. 	sexual abuse and indecent assault (Art. 189), rape (Art. 190), 
abuse of a person incapable of proper judgement or resistance 
(Art. 191), exploitation of a person in a position of need or de-
pendency (Art. 193), deception as to the sexual character of an 
act (Art. 193a), indecent conduct (Art. 194), encouraging 
prostitution (Art. 195), unauthorised passing on of private 
sexual content (Art. 197a) or sexual harassment (Art. 198), 
where the offence is committed against or in front of a minor;
d.	pornography (Art. 197):
1.	under Article 197 paragraph 1 or 3,
2.	under Article 197 paragraph 4 or 5, where the content of 
the items or recordings involved sexual acts with mi-
nors.  
4 If a person receives a sentence or is made subject to a measure under 
Articles 59-61, 63 or 64 for any of the following offences, the court 
shall prohibit him from carrying on any professional activity or organ-
ised non-professional activity that involves regular contact with espe-
cially vulnerable adult persons, as well as any professional activity or 
organised non-professional activity in the health sector that involves 
direct contact with patients: 
a.	trafficking in human beings (Art. 182) where the offence was 
committed for the purpose of the sexual exploitation, sexual 
abuse and indecent assault (Art. 189), rape (Art. 190), sexual 
acts with persons incapable of proper judgement or resistance 
(Art. 191), exploitation of a person in a position of need or de-
pendency (Art. 193), deception as to the sexual character of an 
act (Art. 193a), indecent conduct (Art. 194), encouraging 
prostitution (Art. 195), unauthorised passing on of private 
sexual content (Art. 197a) or sexual harassment (Art. 198), 
where the offence is committed against or in front of: 
1.	an especially vulnerable adult victim, or
2.	an adult victim who is not especially vulnerable, but who 
was incapable of resistance or of judgement or who was 
unable to defend him- or herself as a result of physical or 
psychological dependence;
b.	pornography (Art. 197 para. 2 first sentence and para. 4 or 5), 
where the items or recordings had the following content:
1.	sexual acts with especially vulnerable adult victims, or 
2.	sexual acts with adult victims who are not especially vul-
nerable, but who were incapable of resistance or of 
judgement or who were unable to defend themselves as a 
result of physical or psychological dependence. 
4bis By way of exception, the court may choose not to impose a prohi-
bition order under paragraph 3 or 4 in particularly minor cases if a 
prohibition order of this type does not appear necessary to prevent the 
offender from committing further offences of the same type. A prohi-
bition order is however mandatory if the offender:
a. 	has been convicted of trafficking in human beings (Art. 182), 
indecent assault (Art. 189 paras 2 and 3), rape (Art. 190 pa-
ras 2 and 3), sexual acts with persons incapable of proper 
judgement or resistance (Art. 191) or encouraging prostitution 
(Art. 195); or 
b.	is a paedophile in accordance with the internationally recog-
nised classification criteria.  
5 If the offender receives a sentence or is made subject to a measure 
for two or more offences in the same proceedings, the court shall 
specify what portion of the sentence or which measure applies to an 
offence that entails an activity prohibition order. This portion of the 
sentence, the measure and the offence are decisive in determining 
whether an activity prohibition order under paragraph 1, 2, 2bis, 3 or 4 
is imposed. The sentence portions for two or more relevant offences 
are added together. More than one activity prohibition order may be 
imposed. 
6 The court may order probation assistance for the duration of the 
prohibition orders. 
7 ...  
Art. 67a 
Content and 
scope
1 Professional activities within the meaning of Article 67 are activities 
in exercise of a principal or secondary profession or trade or of a 
commercial enterprise. Organised non-professional activities are 
activities that are not or not primarily carried on for pecuniary gain 
and which are carried on in the context of an association or other 
organisation.
2 The prohibition from carrying on an activity under Article 67 in-
cludes activities that the offender carries on on a self-employed basis, 
as a governing officer of a legal entity or commercial enterprise, or as 
the agent or representative of another person or which he arranges to 
be carried on by a person dependent on his instructions.
3 If there is a risk that the offender will also misuse his activity in 
order to commit offences if he is subject to the orders and control of a 
superior or supervisor, he shall be totally prohibited from carrying on 
the activity.
4 Prohibition orders under Article 67 paragraphs 3 and 4 always apply 
to the entire activity.
5 The following are deemed to be activities with regular contact with 
minors or with other especially vulnerable persons:
a.	activities that directly and specifically involve minors or other 
especially vulnerable persons, and in particular:
1.	teaching or training,
2.	parenting or counselling,
3.	care or supervision,
4.	nursing,
5.	physical examination or treatment,
6.	psychological examination or treatment,
7.	preparing and serving meals,
8.	transport,
9.	the direct sale or loan of objects intended specifically for 
minors or other particularly vulnerable persons, and act-
ing as a direct intermediary in such sales or loans, where 
this is the main activity of the person concerned; 
b.	other activities that are primarily or repeatedly carried on in 
institutions that offer the services listed under letter a, with the 
exception of activities where it is ensured at the location or 
time concerned that no contact with minors or other especially 
vulnerable persons can take place. 
6 Especially vulnerable persons are persons who because of their age, 
an illness or long-term physical, mental or psychological impairment 
are dependent on help from others in their daily activities or way of 
living. 
Art. 67b 
b. Contact 
prohibition and 
exclusion order
1 If a person has committed a felony or misdemeanour against one or 
more specific persons or against persons in a specific group, and if 
there is a risk that he will commit further felonies or misdemeanours 
in the event of having contact with such persons, the court may im-
pose a contact prohibition and exclusion order of up to five years.
2 By means of a contact prohibition and exclusion order the court may 
prohibit the offender from:
a.	contacting one or more specific persons or persons in a specif-
ic group directly or via third parties, in particular by tele-
phone, in writing or online, or employing, accommodating, 
educating, caring for such persons or associating with such 
persons in any other way;
b.	approaching a specific person or coming within a specific dis-
tance of that person's home;
c.	being present in specific locations, in particular specific 
streets, areas or districts.
3 The competent authority may use technical devices that are securely 
attached to the offender in order to enforce the prohibition order. 
These devices may in particular serve to determine the offender's 
location.
4 The court may order probation assistance for the duration of the 
prohibition order.
5 On application from the executive authority, it may extend limited 
prohibition orders by a maximum of five years in each case if this is 
necessary to prevent the offender from committing further felonies 
and misdemeanours against minors or other especially vulnerable 
persons.
Art. 67c 
c. Common 
provisions
Enforcement of 
prohibition 
orders
1 A prohibition order comes into effect on the day on which the judg-
ment takes full legal effect.
2 The duration of a custodial sentence or of a custodial measure 
(Art. 59-61 and 64) is not taken into account in determining the term 
of the prohibition order.
3 If the offender fails to complete the probationary period successfully 
and if the suspended custodial sentence is executed or a recall to 
custody is ordered in respect of a sentence or measure, the term of the 
prohibition order is calculated from the day on which the offender is 
released on parole or granted final release or on which the sanction is 
revoked or remitted.
4 If the offender completes the probationary period successfully, the 
competent authority shall decide on any modification of the conditions 
or term of the prohibition order under Article 67 paragraph 1 or Arti-
cle 67b, or on whether the prohibition order should be revoked.
5 The offender may apply to the competent authority for a modifica-
tion of the conditions or term of the prohibition order, or to have the 
prohibition order revoked:
a.	in the case of a prohibition order under Article 67 paragraph 1 
or under Article 67b: after the order has been in force for two 
years;
b.	in the case of a limited prohibition order under Article 67 par-
agraph 2: after half of the term of the prohibition order, pro-
vided the order has been in force for at least three years;
c. 	... 
d. 	in the case of a lifelong prohibition order under Article 67 par-
agraph 2bis: after the order has been in force for ten years.
6 If it is considered unlikely that the offender will commit any further 
felonies or misdemeanours by misusing an activity or by having 
contact with specific persons of a specific group to and the offender 
has provided reasonable compensation for the loss, damage or injury 
caused, the competent authority shall revoke the prohibition order in 
cases falling under paragraph 4 or 5.
6bis Prohibition orders under Article 67 paragraphs 3 or 4 may not 
revoked.  
7 If the offender breaches an activity prohibition order or a contact 
prohibition and exclusion order or if he fails to comply with the asso-
ciated probation assistance, or if such assistance cannot be provided or 
is no longer required, the competent authority shall submit a report to 
the court or the executive authority. The court or the executive author-
ity may revoke or make a new order for probation assistance.
7bis The executive authority may order probation assistance for the 
entire duration of the prohibition from carrying on an activity or the 
contact and exclusion order. 
8 If the offender fails to comply with the probation assistance during a 
probationary period, Article 95 paragraphs 4 and 5 apply.
9 If the offender breaches an activity prohibition order or a contact 
prohibition and exclusion order during a probationary period, Arti-
cle 294 and the provisions on revoking a suspended sentence or the 
suspended part of a sentence and on a recall to custody in respect of a 
sentence or measure apply.
Art. 67d 
Modification of 
a prohibition 
order or 
subsequent 
imposition of a 
prohibition order
1 If it becomes apparent during the term of an activity prohibition 
order or a contact prohibition and exclusion order that in the offend-
er's case an extension of the prohibition order or an additional such 
prohibition order is required, the court may on application from the 
executive authority extend the prohibition order or impose an addi-
tional prohibition order.
2 If it becomes apparent during a custodial sentence or a custodial 
measure that in the offender's case a prohibition order under Article 
67 paragraph 1 or 2 or under Article 67b is required, the court may 
impose this prohibition order on application from the executive au-
thority.
Art. 67e 
3. Disqualifica-
tion from driving
If the offender has used a motor vehicle in order to commit a felony or 
misdemeanour and where there is a risk of re-offending, the court, in 
addition to imposing a sentence or measure under Articles 59-64, may 
order that the offender forfeit his provisional or full driving licence for 
a period of between one month and five years.
Art. 67f 
Art. 68
4. Publication of 
the judgment
1 If publication of a criminal judgment is required in the public inter-
est, or in the interests of the person harmed or of the complainant, the 
court shall order publication at the expense of the offender.
2 If publication of an acquittal or of a ruling of the prosecution service 
abandoning proceedings is required in the public interest, or in the 
interests of the acquitted person or former suspect, the court shall 
order publication at State expense or at the expense of the complain-
ant.
3 Publication is made in the interests of the person harmed, complain-
ant, acquitted person or former suspect only if such persons so request.
4 The court decides on the form and extent of publication.
Art. 69
5. Forfeiture
a. Forfeiture of 
dangerous 
objects
1 The court shall, irrespective of the criminal liability of any person, 
order the forfeiture of objects that have been used or were intended to 
be used for the commission of an offence or that have been produced 
as a result of the commission of an offence in the event that such 
objects constitute a future danger to public safety, morals or public 
order.
2 The court may order that the objects forfeited be rendered unusable 
or be destroyed.
Art. 70
b. Forfeiture of 
assets
Principles
1 The court shall order the forfeiture of assets that have been acquired 
through the commission of an offence or that are intended to be used 
in the commission of an offence or as payment therefor, unless the 
assets are passed on to the person harmed for the purpose of restoring 
the prior lawful position.
2 Forfeiture is not permitted if a third party has acquired the assets in 
ignorance of the grounds for forfeiture, provided he has paid a consid-
eration of equal value therefor or forfeiture would cause him to endure 
disproportionate hardship.
3 The right to order forfeiture is limited to seven years; if, however, 
the prosecution of the offence is subject to a longer limitation period, 
this period also applies to the right to order forfeiture.
4 Official notice must be given of forfeiture. The rights of persons 
harmed or third parties expire five years after the date on which offi-
cial notice is given.
5 If the amount of the assets to be forfeited cannot be ascertained, or 
may be ascertained only by incurring a disproportionate level of 
trouble and expense, the court may make an estimate.
Art. 71
Equivalent claim
1 If the assets subject to forfeiture are no longer available, the court 
may uphold a claim for compensation by the State in respect of a sum 
of equivalent value, which claim may be enforced against a third party 
only if he is not excluded by Article 70 paragraph 2.
2 The court may dismiss an equivalent claim in its entirety or in part if 
the claim is likely to be unrecoverable or if the claim would seriously 
hinder the rehabilitation of the person concerned.
3 ... 
Art. 72 
Forfeiture of 
assets of a 
criminal or 
terrorist organi-
sation
The court shall order the forfeiture of all assets that are subject to the 
power of disposal of a criminal or terrorist organisation. In the case of 
the assets of a person who participates in or supports such an organisa-
tion (Art. 260ter), it is presumed that the assets are subject to the power 
of disposal of the organisation until the contrary is proven.
Art. 73
6. Use for the 
benefit of the 
person harmed
1 If as a result of a felony or misdemeanour a person has suffered harm 
and is not entitled to benefits under an insurance policy, and if it is 
anticipated that the offender will not pay damages or satisfaction, the 
court shall award the person harmed, at his request, a sum of money 
up to the amount of damages or satisfaction set by a court or agreed in 
a settlement with the person harmed and obtained from:
a.	the monetary penalty or fine paid by the offender;
b.	objects and assets that have been forfeited, or the proceeds of 
their sale after deduction of expenses;
c.	compensatory claims;
d.	the amount of the good behaviour bond.
2 The court may order such an award only if the person harmed as-
signs the corresponding element of his claim to the State.
3 The cantons shall provide a simple and quick procedure for cases 
where their courts are not entitled to make an award of this nature in a 
criminal judgment.

Title Four: 
Execution of Custodial Sentences and Custodial Measures
Art. 74
1. Principles
The human dignity of the prison inmates or of the inmates of an insti-
tution for the execution of measures must be respected. Their rights 
may only be limited to the extent that that is required for the depriva-
tion of their liberty and their co-existence in the penal institution.
Art. 75
2. Execution of 
custodial 
sentences
Principles
1 The execution of sentences must encourage an improvement in the 
social behaviour of the prison inmates, and in particular their ability to 
live their lives without offending again. The conditions under which 
sentences are executed must correspond as far as possible with those 
of normal life, guarantee the supervision of the prison inmates, coun-
teract the harmful consequences of the deprivation of liberty and take 
appropriate account of the need to protect the general public, the 
institution staff and other inmates.
2 ... 
3 The institution rules shall provide that a sentence management plan 
be drawn up in consultation with the prison inmate. This plan in 
particular contains details of the supervision offered, the opportunities 
to work and receive basic or advanced training, making reparation, 
relations with the outside world and preparations for release.
4 The prison inmate must actively cooperate in resocialisation efforts 
and the preparations for release.
5 Account is taken of the gender-specific concerns and needs of the 
prison inmates.
6 If the prison inmate is released on parole or granted final release and 
it subsequently comes to light that on his release he was subject to 
another executable judgment imposing a custodial sentence, execution 
of that custodial sentence is waived if:
a.	it was not executed concurrently with the other custodial sen-
tence for a reason within the control of the executive authorities;
b.	the prison inmate was able to assume in good faith that on his 
release he was not subject to another executable judgment im-
posing a custodial sentence; and
c.	the reintegration of the prison inmates would be prejudiced.
Art. 75a 
Special security 
measures
1 The Commission under Article 62d paragraph 2 shall with a view to 
a transfer to an open penal institution and the authorisation of a relaxa-
tion in the execution of the sentence assess the danger to the commu-
nity of the offender if:
a.	he has committed a felony in terms of Article 64 paragraph 1; 
and 
b.	the executive authority cannot satisfactorily answer the ques-
tion of whether he is a danger to other prison inmates.
2 Relaxation of the execution of the sentence involves easing the 
regime for the deprivation of liberty, in particular by means of a 
transfer to an open institution, the granting of release on temporary 
licence, the authorisation of day release employment or of external 
accommodation and the granting of parole. 
3 Danger to the community is assumed if there is a risk that the prison 
inmate will abscond and commit a further offence that severely preju-
dices the physical, psychological or sexual integrity of another person.
Art. 76
Place of 
execution
1 Custodial sentences are executed in a secure or open penal institu-
tion.
2 The prison inmate shall be admitted to a secure penal institution or to 
the secure section of an open penal institution if there is a risk that that 
he will abscond or it is expected that he will commit further offences.
Art. 77
Normal execu-
tion
The prison inmate normally spends his working, rest and leisure time 
in the institution.
Art. 77a
Day release 
employment and 
external 
accommodation
1 The custodial sentence is executed in the form of day release em-
ployment if the prison inmate has served part of the custodial sen-
tence, normally a minimum one half, and it is not expected that he will 
abscond or commit further offences.
2 In day release employment, the prison inmate works outside the 
institution and spends his rest and leisure time in the institution. The 
change to day release employment normally takes place following an 
appropriate period spent in an open institution or the open section of a 
secure institution. Work outside the institution may also include 
housework and caring for children.
3 If the prison inmate proves himself to be of good behaviour in day 
release employment, the further execution of the sentence takes the 
form of external accommodation and day release employment. Here 
the prison inmate lives and works outside the institution, but remains 
under the supervision of the executive authority. 
Art. 77b 
Semi-detention
1 At the offender's request, a custodial sentence of no more than 12 
months or the remainder of a sentence after taking account of time 
spent on remand of no more than six months may be served in the 
form of semi-detention provided:
a.	it is not anticipated that the offender will abscond or commit 
further offences; and
b.	the offender does regulated work or training or is similarly oc-
cupied for at least 20 hours a week.
2 The prison inmate works, is trained or similarly occupied outside the 
institution and spends his rest and leisure time in the institution.
3 Semi-detention may be served in a special section of a remand centre 
provided the offender is guaranteed the required supervision.
4 If the offender no longer meets the authorisation requirements or if 
he fails to comply with the conditions of semi-detention imposed by 
the executive authority despite being warned to do so, the custodial 
sentence shall be served in the normal manner.
Art. 78
Solitary con-
finement
Solitary confinement in the form of uninterrupted separation from 
other prison inmates may only be ordered:
a.	for a maximum of one week at the start of the sentence in or-
der to initiate the execution of the sentence;
b.	for the protection of the prison inmate or of third parties;
c.	as a disciplinary sanction;
d. 	to prevent other prison inmates from being influenced by ideas 
that may encourage them to carry out terrorist activities, pro-
vided there is specific evidence of such an influence.
Art. 79 
Art. 79a 
Community 
service
1 If it is not anticipated that the offender will abscond or commit 
further offences, the following sentences may be served in the form of 
community service:
a.	a custodial sentence of no more than six months;
b.	the remainder of a sentence of no more than six months after 
taking account of time spent on remand; or
c.	a monetary penalty or a fine.
2 Community service is not permitted as a means of serving an alterna-
tive custodial sentence.
3 Community service is work that benefits social institutions, public 
works or persons in need. The work is unpaid.
4 Four hours of community service correspond to one day of a custo-
dial sentence, one daily penalty unit of a monetary penalty or one day 
of an alternative custodial sentence in the case of contraventions.
5 The executive authority shall allow the offender a specific period not 
exceeding two years within which to complete the community service. 
In the case of community service carried out in lieu of a fine, this 
period may not exceed one year. 
6 If the offender fails to comply with the conditions of community 
service imposed by the executive authority despite being warned to do 
so, the custodial sentence shall be served in the normal manner or in 
the form of semi-detention, or the monetary penalty or fine shall be 
enforced.
Art. 79b 
Electronic 
monitoring
1 At the request of the offender, the executive authority may order the 
use of electronic devices and their secure attachment to the offender's 
body (electronic monitoring):
a.	in execution of a custodial sentence or an alternative custodial 
sentence of from 20 days to 12 months; or
b.	in lieu of day release employment or day release employment 
and external accommodation for a term of from 3 to 
12 months.
2 The executive authority may order electronic monitoring only if:
a.	it is not anticipated that the offender will abscond or commit 
further offences;
b.	the offender lives in permanent accommodation;
c.	the offender is doing regulated work or training or is similarly 
occupied for at least 20 hours a week or can be assigned to do 
the same;
d.	the adults living with the offender in the same accommodation 
consent; and
e.	the offender agrees to the implementation plan drawn up for 
him.
3 If the requirements of paragraph 2 letter a, b or c are no longer met 
or if the offender fails to fulfil the obligations set out in the implemen-
tation plan, the executive authority may discontinue the electronic 
monitoring and order the sentence to be served in the normal manner 
or in the form of semi-detention, or restrict the free time available to 
the offender.
Art. 80
Other forms of 
sentence 
execution
1 A departure from the rules governing the execution of sentences in 
favour of the prison inmates may be permitted:
a.	if the state of health of the prison inmates so requires;
b.	in the event of pregnancy, childbirth and for the time immedi-
ately after childbirth;
c.	to enable the mother and infant to be accommodated together, 
provided this is also in the interests of the child.
2 If the sentence is not served in a penal institution, but in another 
appropriate institution, the prison inmate is subject to the regulations 
of that institution unless the executive authority orders otherwise.
Art. 81
Work
1 The prison inmate is obliged to work. Wherever possible, the work 
should be appropriate to his skills, education and training and his 
interests.
2 If he consents to do so, the prison inmate may work for a private 
employer.
Art. 82
Basic and 
advanced 
training
Where he shows the required aptitude and the possibility exists, the 
prison inmate is given the opportunity to undergo basic and advanced 
training appropriate to his skills.
Art. 83
Wages
1 The prison inmate receives a wage for his work based on his perfor-
mance and according to the circumstances.
2 The prison inmate may freely dispose of only part of his wage while 
serving his sentence. The remaining part is withheld until the inmate 
has been released. The wage may neither be pledged, seized nor 
included in an insolvent estate. Any assignment or pledge of the wage 
is null and void.
3 If the prison inmate participates in basic or advanced training instead 
of work in accordance with his sentence management plan, he receives 
appropriate remuneration.
Art. 84
Relations with 
the outside world
1 The prison inmate has the right to receive visitors and to cultivate 
contacts with persons outside the institution. Contact with close rela-
tives and friends shall be facilitated.
2 Contact may be monitored and for the preservation of order and 
security in the penal institution it may be restricted or prohibited. The 
monitoring of visits is not permitted without the knowledge of those 
concerned. The foregoing does not apply to procedural measures in 
order to secure evidence for the purposes of a prosecution.
3 Clerics, doctors, attorneys, notaries and guardians as well as persons 
with comparable duties may be permitted to communicate freely with 
the prison inmates subject to the general institution rules.
4 Contact with defence attorneys must be permitted. Visits from the 
defence attorney may be supervised but conversations may not be 
listened in on. Inspecting the content of correspondence and attorneys' 
documents is not permitted. Contact with attorneys may be prohibited 
by the competent authority in the event of abuse.
5 Communications with the supervisory authorities may not be moni-
tored.
6 The prison inmate shall be granted release on temporary licence to 
an appropriate extent in order to cultivate relations with the outside 
world, prepare for his release or where there are special circumstanc-
es, provided his conduct in custody does not preclude this and there is 
no risk that he will abscond or commit further offences.
6bis Offenders subject to indefinite incarceration are not granted re-
lease on temporary licence or other relaxations of the execution of the 
sentence during the sentence served prior to incarceration. 
7 Article 36 of the Vienna Convention of 24 April 1963  on Consu-
lar Relations and other regulations under international law on visits 
and correspondence that are binding on Switzerland are reserved.
Art. 85
Searches and 
inspections
1 The personal effects and the accommodation of the prison inmate 
may be searched in the interests of maintaining order and security in 
the penal institution.
2 A prison inmate who is suspected of concealing unpermitted articles 
about his person or in his body, may be subjected to a body search. 
The search must be conducted by a person of the same gender. If the 
removal of clothing is required, this must be carried out in the absence 
of other prison inmates. Searches of body cavities must be carried out 
by a doctor or other medically qualified staff.
Art. 86
Parole
a. Granting of 
parole
1 If the prison inmate has served two thirds of his sentence, provided 
this amounts to at least three months, he shall be released on parole by 
the competent authority if this is justified by his conduct while in 
custody and it is not expected that he will commit further felonies or 
misdemeanours.
2 The competent authority shall assess ex officio whether the inmate 
may be released on parole. It shall obtain a report from the institution 
board. The prison inmate shall be granted a hearing.
3 If parole is refused, the competent authority must reassess the ques-
tion of whether parole may be granted at least once each year.
4 If the prison inmate has served half of his sentence, provided this 
amounts to at least three months, he may be released on parole by way 
of exception, if exceptional personal circumstances justify this.
5 In the case of persons serving a life sentence, parole under paragraph 
1 is possible at the earliest after 15 years, and under paragraph 4 at the 
earliest after ten years.
Art. 87
b. Probationary 
period
1 A person released on parole is made subject to a probationary period 
of a duration that corresponds to the remainder of his sentence. The 
period however amounts to at least one year and no more than five 
years.
2 The executive authority shall normally order probation assistance for 
the duration of the probationary period. It may impose conduct orders 
on the person released on parole.
3 If parole is granted to an inmate serving a custodial sentence for an 
offence mentioned in Article 64 paragraph 1, and if on expiry of the 
probationary period a continuation of the probation assistance or the 
conduct orders appear to be required in order to reduce the risk of 
further offences of this type being committed, the court may at the 
request of the executive authority extend the probation assistance or 
the conduct orders in each case by one to five years or impose a new 
conduct order for this period. A recall to custody in accordance with 
Article 95 paragraph 5 is not possible in such cases.
Art. 88
c. Successful 
completion of 
probation
If the person released on parole is of good behaviour throughout the 
probationary period, he is granted final release.


Art. 89
d. Breach of 
probation
1 If a person released on parole commits a felony or misdemeanour 
during the probationary period, the court judging the new offence shall 
order his recall to custody.
2 If, despite the commission of a felony or misdemeanour during the 
probationary period, it is not expected that the offender will commit 
further offences, the court shall dispense with a recall to custody. It 
may admonish the offender and extend the probationary period by no 
more than half of the period originally fixed by the competent authori-
ty. If the extension is ordered after the expiry of the original proba-
tionary period, it begins on the day on which it is ordered. The provi-
sions on probation assistance and conduct orders apply (Art. 93-95).
3 If a person released on parole fails to comply with the conditions of 
probation assistance or disregards the conduct orders, Article 95 
paragraphs 3-5 applies.
4 A recall to custody may not be ordered if three years have elapsed 
since the expiry of the probationary period.
5 Any period of time spent on remand that the offender has served 
during the recall to custody proceedings is taken into account in the 
remainder of his sentence.
6 If the requirements for an unsuspended custodial sentence are ful-
filled due to the new offence and if this coincides with the remainder 
of the sentence that must be executed by the recall to custody, the 
court shall impose a cumulative sentence in application of Article 49 
a. The rules on parole again apply to this sentence. If only the remain-
der of the sentence is executed, Article 86 paragraphs 1-4 applies.
7 If the remainder of a sentence that must be executed in accordance 
with a decision on recall to custody coincides with the execution of a 
measure under Articles 59-61, Article 57 paragraphs 2 and 3 applies.
Art. 90
3. Execution of 
measures
1 A person subject to the execution of a measure under Articles 59-61, 
may only be accommodated without interruption separately from the 
other inmates of an institution for the execution of measures if this is 
essential:
a.	as a temporary therapeutic measure;
b.	for the protection of other inmates of the institution or of third 
parties;
c.	as a disciplinary sanction;
d. 	to prevent other prison inmates from being influenced by ideas 
that may encourage them to carry out terrorist activities, pro-
vided there is specific evidence of such an influence.
2 At the start of the execution of the measure, a sentence management 
plan is drawn up in consultation with the inmate or his legal repre-
sentative. This includes in particular details of the treatment of the 
inmate's mental disorder, dependence or developmental disorder and 
on measures to prevent the endangerment of others.
2bis Measures under Articles 59-61 and 64 may be executed in the 
form of external accommodation and day release employment if there 
is a justified opinion that this will significantly contribute to the aim of 
the measure being achieved, and if there is no risk that the inmate will 
abscond or will commit further offences. Article 77a paragraphs 2 and 
3 applies by analogy. 
3 If the inmate is able to work, he is required to work to the extent that 
his in-patient treatment or care requires or permits. Articles 81-83 
apply in an analogous manner.
4 Article 84 applies by analogy to the relations of the inmates of an 
institution for the execution of measures with the outside world, 
unless additional restrictions are required for reasons relating to the in-
patient treatment.
4bis Article 75a applies by analogy to admission to an open institution 
and to the authorisation of a relaxation in the measures regime. 
4ter During lifelong incarceration, it is not permitted to authorise 
release on temporary licence or a relaxation of the sentence regime. 
5 Article 85 applies by analogy to searches and inspections.
Art. 91
4. General 
provisions
Disciplinary 
regulations
1 Disciplinary sanctions may be imposed on prison inmates and in-
mates of an institution for the execution of measures who are guilty of 
infringing the institution regulations or the sentence management plan.
2 Disciplinary sanctions are:
a.	a reprimand;
b.	the temporary withdrawal or restriction of the right to use 
money, participate in recreational activities or have external 
contacts;
c. 	a fine; and
d. 	solitary confinement as an additional restriction of liberty.
3 The cantons shall enact disciplinary regulations applicable to the 
execution of sentences and measures. The regulations detail the disci-
plinary offences, the sanctions and how they are fixed, and regulate 
the procedure.
Art. 92
Interruption of 
execution
The execution of sentences and measures may be interrupted for good 
cause.
Art. 92a 
Right to 
information
1 Victims and relatives of victims as defined in Article 1 paragraphs 1 
and 2 of the Victim Support Act of 23 March 2007  (VSA) and third 
parties who have a legitimate interest may make a written request to 
the executive authority for the following information:
a.	the time of execution of the sentence or measure imposed on 
the offender, institution responsible for execution, the form of 
execution if it differs from normal, interruptions and relaxa-
tions in the sentence or measure, (Art. 75a para. 2), parole and 
final release, and the reactivation of the execution of a sentence 
or measure;
b.	immediate notification of the escape of an offender and of his 
or her recapture.
2 The executive authority decides on the request after consulting the 
offender.
3 It may refuse to provide the information or revoke a previous deci-
sion to provide information only if the offender's legitimate interests 
justify this.
4 If the executive authority approves a request, it shall advise the 
person entitled to information of the confidentiality of the information 
disclosed. Persons entitled to victim support under the VSA are not 
required to maintain confidentiality in their dealings with a counsellor 
at a counselling service under Article 9 VSA.

Title Five: 
Probation Assistance, Conduct Orders and Voluntary 
Social Supervision
Art. 93
Probation 
assistance
1 Probation assistance is intended to protect the probationers from 
reoffending and enable their social integration. The competent authori-
ty for probation assistance provides and arranges for the required 
social and specialist services.
2 Persons working in the field of probation assistance must treat mat-
ters that come to their knowledge in the course of their work as confi-
dential. They may disclose information on the personal circumstances 
of a probationer to third parties only if the probationer or the person in 
charge of probation assistance has consented in writing.
3 The authorities for the administration of criminal justice may obtain 
a report on the probationer from the competent authority for probation 
assistance.
Art. 94 
Conduct orders
1 The conduct orders that the court or the executive authority may 
impose on the offender for duration of the probationary period relate in 
particular to the practice of a profession, place of residence, driving 
motor vehicles, reparation and medical and psychological therapy.
2 In the case of offences against sexual integrity, the offender may be 
required to attend a course.
Art. 95
General provi-
sions
1 Prior to making their decision on probation assistance and conduct 
orders, the court and the executive authority may obtain a report from 
the authority responsible for supervising the probation assistance and 
the conduct orders or for enforcing activity prohibition orders or 
contact prohibition and exclusion orders.  The person concerned 
may state his opinion on the report. Differences of opinion must be 
recorded in the report.
2 The ordering of probation assistance and conduct orders must be 
noted and justified in the judgment or the decision.
3 If the offender fails to comply with the conditions of probation 
assistance or disregards the conduct orders or if the probation assis-
tance or conduct orders cannot be implemented or are no longer re-
quired, the competent authority shall submit a report to the court or the 
authorities responsible for the execution of sentences and measures.
4 The court or the executive authority may in the cases mentioned in 
paragraph 3:
a.	extend the probationary period by one half;
b.	revoke or reorganise the probation assistance;
c.	modify or revoke the conduct orders or issue new conduct or-
ders.
5 The court may in the cases in paragraph 3 revoke the suspended 
sentence or order the recall to custody for the execution of the sen-
tence or measure if it is seriously expected that the offender will 
commit further offences.
Art. 96
Social assistance
The cantons shall guarantee the provision of social assistance for the 
duration of the criminal proceedings and of the execution of the sen-
tence which may be claimed voluntarily.

Title Six: Statute of Limitations
Art. 97
1. Limitation of 
prosecution 
rights
Periods
1 The right to prosecute is subject to a time limit of:
a.	30 years if the offence carries a custodial sentence of life;
b.	15 years if the offence carries a custodial sentence of more 
than three years;
c.	10 years if the offence carries a custodial sentence of three 
years;
d. 	seven years if the offence carries a different penalty. 
2 In the case of sexual acts with children (Art. 187) and in the case 
offences under Articles 111, 113, 122, 124, 182, 189-191, 193, 193a, 
195 and 197 paragraph 3 involving a child under 16, the limitation 
period in each case runs at least until the victim has attained the age of 
25. 
3 If a judgment is issued by a court of first instance before expiry of 
the limitation period, the time limit no longer applies.
4 The limitation of the right to prosecute in the case of sexual acts with 
children (Art. 187) and dependent minors (Art. 188) and offences 
under Articles 111-113, 122, 182, 189-191 and 195 involving a child 
under 16 is governed by paragraphs 1-3 if the offence was committed 
before the amendment of 5 October 2001  came into force and the 
limitation of the right to prosecute had not yet taken effect. 
Art. 98
Commencement
The limitation period begins:
a.	on the day on which the offender committed the offence;
b.	on the day on which the final act was carried out if the offence 
consists of a series of acts carried out at different times;
c.	on the day on which the criminal conduct ceases if the crimi-
nal conduct continues over a period of time.
Art. 99
2. Limitation 
period for the 
execution of a 
sentence
Periods
1 The right to execute a sentence is subject to a limitation period of:
a.	30 years if a custodial sentence of life has been imposed;
b.	25 years if a custodial sentence of ten or more years has been 
imposed;
c.	20 years if a custodial sentence at least five and less than ten 
years has been imposed;
d.	15 years, if a custodial sentence of more than one and less than 
five years has been imposed;
e.	five years if any other sentence has been imposed.
2 The limitation period for a custodial sentence is extended:
a.	by the time that the offender spends serving without interrup-
tion that or any other custodial sentence or measure that is ex-
ecuted immediately beforehand;
b.	by the length of the probationary period in the case of release 
on parole.
Art. 100
Commencement
The limitation period begins on the day on which the judgment be-
comes legally enforceable, and in the case of suspended sentences or 
the execution of a measure, on the day on which the execution of the 
penalty is ordered.
Art. 101
3. Exclusion 
from limitation
1 There is no statute of limitations for the offences of:
a.	genocide (Art. 264);
b.	crimes against humanity (Art. 264a para. 1 and 2);
c.	war crimes (Art. 264c para. 1-3, 264d para. 1 and 2, 264e 
para. 1 and 2, 264f, 264g para. 1 and 2 and 264h);
d.	felonies that have caused or threatened to cause danger to life 
and limb to a large number of persons as a method of extortion 
or duress, in particular through the use of means of mass de-
struction, the causing of catastrophes, or as part of a hostage 
taking offence;
e. 	sexual acts with children (Art. 187 Nos 1 and 1bis), sexual 
abuse and indecent assault (Art. 189), rape (Art. 190), sexual 
acts with persons incapable of proper judgement or resistance 
(Art. 191), exploitation of a person in a position of need or de-
pendency (Art. 193) and deception as to the sexual character 
of an act (Art. 193a) if committed against children under the 
age of 12. 
2 If the right to prosecute the offence would have become time barred 
had Articles 97 and 98 applied, the court may in its discretion impose 
a more lenient penalty.
3 Paragraphs 1 letters a, c and d and paragraph 2 apply if the right to 
prosecute or execute the sentence had not become time barred by 1 
January 1983 in accordance with the law applicable until that point in 
time. Paragraph 1 letter b applies if the right to prosecute or execute 
the penalty has not become time barred under the previous law when 
the Amendment of 18 June 2010 to this Code comes into force. Para-
graph 1 letter e applies if the prosecution or the sentence has not 
become time barred by 30 November 2008 in accordance with the law 
applicable until that point in time.   

Title Seven: Corporate Criminal Liability
Art. 102
Liability under 
the criminal law
1 If a felony or misdemeanour is committed in an undertaking in the 
exercise of commercial activities in accordance with the objects of the 
undertaking and if it is not possible to attribute this act to any specific 
natural person due to the inadequate organisation of the undertaking, 
then the felony or misdemeanour is attributed to the undertaking. In 
such cases, the undertaking shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 
5 million francs.
2 If the offence committed falls under Articles 260ter, 260quinquies, 
305bis, 322ter, 322quinquies, 322septies paragraph 1 or 322octies, the under-
taking is penalised irrespective of the criminal liability of any natural 
persons, provided the undertaking has failed to take all the reasonable 
organisational measures that are required in order to prevent such an 
offence. 
3 The court assesses the fine in particular in accordance with the 
seriousness of the offence, the seriousness of the organisational inade-
quacies and of the loss or damage caused, and based on the economic 
ability of the undertaking to pay the fine.
4 Undertakings within the meaning of this title are:
a.	any legal entity under private law;
b.	any legal entity under public law with exception of local au-
thorities;
c.	companies;
d.	sole proprietorships .
Art. 102a 

Part Two: Contraventions
Art. 103
Definition
Contraventions are acts that are punishable by a fine.
Art. 104
Application of 
the provisions of 
the First Part
The provisions of the First Part also apply to contraventions, subject to 
the following changes.
Art. 105
No or condition-
al applicability
1 The provisions on suspended and partially suspended sentences 
(Art. 42 and 43), on expulsion (Art. 66a-66d) and on corporate crimi-
nal liability (Art. 102) do not apply to contraventions. 
2 Attempt and complicity are offences only in the cases expressly 
mentioned in this Code. 
3 Custodial measures (Art. 59-61 and 64), activity prohibition orders 
(Art. 67), contact prohibition and exclusion orders (Art. 67b) and the 
publication of the judgment (Art. 68) are permitted only in the cases 
expressly mentioned in this Code. 
Art. 106
Fines
1 Unless the law provides otherwise, the maximum amount of a fine is 
10,000 francs.
2 In its judgment, the court shall impose an alternative custodial sen-
tence of at least one day and a maximum of three months for the event 
that the fine is wilfully not paid.
3 The court determines the fine and the alternative custodial sentence 
based on the offender's circumstances so that the offender receives the 
sentence that is commensurate with his culpable conduct.
4 On retrospective payment of the fine, the offender is released from 
the alternative custodial sentence.
5 Articles 35 and 36 paragraph 2 apply by analogy to the collection 
and conversion of the fine. 
Art. 107 
Art. 108 
Art. 109
Limitation
The right to prosecute and to execute a sentence is subject to a limita-
tion period of three years.

Part Three: Terms and Definitions
Art. 110
1 Close relatives of a person are his or her spouse, registered partner, 
relatives of direct lineage, full siblings and half siblings, adoptive 
parents, adoptive siblings and adoptive children. 
2 Family members are persons who live in the same household.
3 Public officials are the officials and employees of a public adminis-
trative authority or of an authority for the administration of justice as 
well as persons who hold office temporarily or are employed tempo-
rarily by a public administrative authority or by an authority for the 
administration of justice or who carry out official functions temporari-
ly.
3bis If a provision refers to the term "property", it also applies to ani-
mals. 
4 Official documents are written works intended and designed to prove 
a fact of legal relevance, or indications that are intended to prove such 
a fact. Recordings on image and data carriers are equivalent to a 
written document, provided that they serve the same purpose.
5 Public deeds are official documents issued by members of an author-
ity, public officials and holders of public office in the exercise official 
powers. Official documents that are issued in private law transactions 
by the management of commercial companies, state monopoly com-
panies or other public corporations or institutions are not public offi-
cial documents.
6 A day has 24 successive hours. The month and the year are calculat-
ed according to the calendar.
7 Time spent on remand is any form of detention, remand, preventive 
detention or detention pending extradition imposed in criminal pro-
ceedings.

Book Two: Specific Provisions
Title One: Offences against Life and Limb
Art. 111
1. Homicide
Intentional 
homicide
Any person who kills a person intentionally, but without fulfilling the 
special requirements of the following articles, shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence  of not less than five years.
Art. 112 
Murder
Where the offender acts in a particularly unscrupulous manner, in 
which the motive, the objective or the method of commission is par-
ticularly depraved, a custodial sentence for life or a custodial sentence 
of not less than ten years shall be imposed. 
Art. 113 
Manslaughter
Where the offender acts in a state of extreme emotion that is excusable 
in the circumstances, or in a state of profound psychological stress, a 
custodial sentence of from one to ten years shall be imposed. 
Art. 114  
Homicide at the 
request of the 
victim
Any person who for commendable motives, and in particular out of 
compassion for the victim, causes the death of a person at that per-
son's own genuine and insistent request shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty  .
Art. 115
Inciting and 
assisting suicide
Any person who for selfish motives incites or assists another to com-
mit or attempt to commit suicide shall, if that other person thereafter 
commits or attempts to commit suicide, be liable to a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty  .
Art. 116  
Infanticide
If a mother kills her child either during delivery or while she is under 
the influence of the effects of giving birth, sa custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 117
Homicide 
through negli-
gence
Any person who causes the death of another through negligence or 
recklessness shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 118 
2. Abortion
Illegal abortion
1 Any person who terminates a pregnancy with the consent of the 
pregnant woman or incites or assists a pregnant woman to terminate 
her pregnancy without the requirements of Article 119 being fulfilled 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2 Any person who terminates a pregnancy without the consent of the 
pregnant woman shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from one  
to ten years.
3 Any woman who has her pregnancy terminated or otherwise partici-
pates in the termination of her pregnancy following the end of the 
twelfth week since her last period and without the requirements of 
Article 119 being fulfilled shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
4 Cases falling under paragraphs 1 and 3 above are subject to a limita-
tion period of three years. 
Art. 119 
Legal abortion
1 The termination of a pregnancy is exempt from penalty in the event 
that the termination is, in the judgment of a physician, necessary in 
order to be able to prevent the pregnant woman from sustaining seri-
ous physical injury or serious psychological distress. The risk must be 
greater the more advanced the pregnancy is.
2 The termination of a pregnancy is likewise exempt from penalty if, 
at the written request of a pregnant woman, who claims that she is in a 
state of distress, it is performed within twelve weeks of the start of the 
pregnant woman's last period by a physician who is licensed to prac-
tise his profession. The physician must have a detailed consultation 
with the woman prior to the termination and provide her with appro-
priate counselling.
3 If the woman is incapable of judgement, the consent of her legal 
representative is required.
4 The cantons designate the medical practices and hospitals that fulfil 
the requirements for the professional conduct of procedures to termi-
nate pregnancy and for the provision of counselling.
5 An abortion is reported for statistical purposes to the competent health 
authority, whereby the anonymity of the woman concerned is guaran-
teed and medical confidentiality is preserved.
Art. 120 
Contraventions 
by physicians
1 Any physician who terminates a pregnancy in terms of Article 119 
paragraph 2 and who fails, prior to the procedure:
a.	to obtain a written request from the pregnant woman;
b.	to discuss the termination in detail with the pregnant woman 
and to counsel her, to advise her of the risks of the procedure 
to her health, and to provide her with a written guide, the re-
ceipt of which she must acknowledge with her signature, that 
contains:
1.	a list of agencies that provide counselling free of charge,
2.	a list of associations and agencies that offer moral and 
material support, and
3.	information on the possibility of having the child adopt-
ed;
c.	to satisfy himself that a pregnant woman under 16 years of age 
has been in contact with a counselling agency specialised in 
dealing with young people.
shall be liable to a fine .
2 Any physician who fails to report the termination of a pregnancy to 
the competent authority in accordance with Article 119 paragraph 5 
shall be liable to the same penalty.
Art. 121 
Art. 122 
3. Assault
Serious assault
Any person who wilfully:
a.	inflicts a life-threatening injury on another;
b.	inflicts a serious injury on the person, or on an important or-
gan or limb of another, makes an important organ or limb un-
usable, makes another permanently unfit for work, infirm or 
mentally ill, or who disfigures the face of another badly and 
permanently;
c.	causes any other serious damage to the person or to the physi-
cal or mental health of another,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from one year to ten years.
Art. 123 
Common assault
1.  Any person who wilfully causes injury to the person or the health 
of another in any other way shall be liable on complaint to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
...   
2.  The offender shall be prosecuted ex officio,  
if he uses poison, a weapon or a dangerous object,
if he commits the act on a person, and in particular on a child, who is 
unable to defend himself, or is under his protection or in his care.
if he is the spouse of the victim and the act was committed during the 
marriage or up to one year after divorce, 
if he is the registered partner of the victim and the offence was com-
mitted during the period of the registered partnership or up to a year 
after its dissolution,  or
if he is the heterosexual or homosexual partner of the victim provided 
they have at any time cohabited and the act was committed at that time 
or up to one year after separation. 
Art. 124 
Female genital 
mutilation
1 Any person who mutilates the genitals of a female person, impairs 
their natural function seriously and permanently or damages them in 
some other way shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from six 
months to ten years or to a monetary penalty.  
2 Any person who has committed the offence abroad but is now in 
Switzerland and is not extradited shall be liable to the foregoing 
penalties. Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 apply.
Art. 125
Assault through 
negligence
1 Any person who causes injury to the person or the health of another 
through negligence shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty. 
2 If the injury is serious, the offender shall be prosecuted ex officio.
Art. 126
Acts of aggres-
sion
1 Any person who commits acts of aggression against another that do 
not cause any injury to the person or health shall be liable on com-
plaint to a fine.
2 The offender is prosecuted ex officio if he commits the offence 
repeatedly:
a.	on a person under his protection or in his care, and in particu-
lar on a child;
b.	on his spouse during the marriage or up to a year after divorce; 
or
bbis. 	on his registered partner during the period of the registered 
partnership or up to a year after its dissolution; or
c.	on his heterosexual or homosexual partner provided they have 
at any time cohabited and the act was committed at that time 
or up to one year after separation. 
Art. 127  
4. Endangering 
the life or health 
of another
Abandonment
Any person who exposes a helpless person under his protection or care 
to a life-threatening danger or to a serious and immediate danger to 
health, or abandons the person to such a danger shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 128 
Failure to offer 
aid in an 
emergency
Any person who fails to offer aid to another whom he has injured or to 
another who is in immediate life-threatening danger, in circumstances 
where the person either could reasonably have been expected to offer 
aid,
any person who prevents or hinders others from offering aid,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 128bis  
False alarm
Any person who wilfully and without good reason alerts a public or 
charitable security, rescue or emergency service, and in particular the 
police, fire or ambulance services shall be liable to a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 129  
Endangering life
Any person who unscrupulously places another in immediate life-
threatening danger shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceed-
ing five years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 130-132 
Art. 133 
Brawling
1 Any person who participates in a brawl that results in the death of or 
in an assault causing injury shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 A participant in a brawl who acts exclusively in self-defence or in 
order to separate the other participants is not liable to a penalty.
Art. 134 
Attack
Any person who participates in an attack on one or more other persons 
which causes death or injury to a person attacked or another shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary 
penalty .
Art. 135  
Representations 
of acts of 
violence
1 Any person who produces, imports, stores, markets, promotes, 
exhibits, offers, shows, makes accessible, acquires, procures or pos-
sesses by electronic means or otherwise or makes available sound, 
film or video recordings or other items or representations in which 
acts of extreme violence towards adults or animals or simulated acts of 
cruelty towards minors are portrayed, without reasonable cultural or 
scientific grounds therefor, and in doing so seriously offends basic 
human dignity shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty. If the items or representations 
have genuine acts of cruelty towards minors as their content, a custo-
dial sentence not exceeding five years or a monetary penalty shall be 
imposed.
2 Any person who consumes or for their own consumption produces, 
imports, stores, acquires, procures by electronic or other means or 
possesses the items or representations mentioned in the first sentence 
of paragraph 1 above, shall be liable to a custodial sentence not ex-
ceeding one year or to a monetary penalty. If the items or representa-
tions have genuine acts of cruelty towards minors as their content, a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed
3 The items concerned shall be forfeited.
Art. 136 
Administering 
substances 
capable of 
causing injury to 
children
Any person who administers or makes available for consumption to 
children under the age of 16 alcoholic beverages or other substances in 
such quantities as may endanger their health shall be liable to a custo-
dial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.

Title Two:  Offences against Property
Art. 137
1. Offences 
against property
Unlawful 
appropriation
1.  Any person who for his own or for another's unlawful gain appro-
priates moveable property which belongs to another shall be liable, 
unless the special requirements of Articles 138-140 apply, to a custo-
dial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender has found the property or if the property has inad-
vertently come into his possession,
if he does not act for financial gain or
if he acts only to the detriment of a relative or family member,
the offence shall only be prosecuted on complaint.
Art. 138
Misappropriation
1.  Any person who for his own or another's unlawful gain appropri-
ates moveable property belonging to another but entrusted to him,
any person who makes unlawful use of financial assets entrusted to 
him for his own or another's benefit,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Misappropriation to the detriment of a relative or family member is 
prosecuted only on complaint.
2.  Any person who commits the foregoing offence in his capacity as a 
member of a public authority, or as a public official, guardian, adviser, 
professional asset manager, or in the practice of a profession or a trade 
or the execution of a commercial transaction for which he has been 
authorised by a public authority, shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding ten years or to a monetary penalty.  
Art. 139
Theft
1.  Any person who for his own or for another's unlawful gain, appro-
priates moveable property belonging to another person with the object 
of permanently depriving the owner of it shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  ... 
3.  The offender shall be liable to a custodial sentence of at least six 
months and no more than ten years if he:
a.	steals for commercial gain;
b.	commits theft as a member of a group that has been formed 
for the purpose of carrying out repeated acts of robbery or 
theft;
c.	carries a firearm or other dangerous weapon for the purpose of 
committing theft or causes an explosion; or
d.	otherwise reveals a particular danger due to the manner in 
which he commits the theft. 
4.  Theft to the detriment of a relative or family member shall be 
prosecuted only on complaint.
Art. 140
Robbery
1. Any person who commits theft by using force on another, threaten-
ing another with imminent danger to life or limb, or making another 
incapable of resistance shall be liable to a custodial sentence of at least 
six months and no more than ten years. 
Any person who, when caught in the act of committing theft, commits 
any of the coercive acts mentioned in the foregoing paragraph in order 
to retain the stolen property shall be liable the same penalties.
2.  The offender shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than 
one year  if he carries with him a firearm or other dangerous weapon 
for the purpose of committing robbery.
3.  The offender shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than 
two years,
if he commits robbery as a member of a group that has been formed 
for the purpose of carrying out repeated acts of robbery or theft,
or if he represents a particular danger in any other way due to the 
manner in which he commits robbery.
4.  The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than five years, if the 
offender endangers the life of the victim, commits a serious assault on 
the victim or otherwise treats the victim with cruelty.
Art. 141
Removal of 
property
Any person who takes moveable property from the person entitled to it 
to the serious detriment of that person but without intending to perma-
nently deprive the entitled person of it shall be liable on complaint to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 141bis
Unlawful use of 
financial assets
Any person who for his own or another's benefit unlawfully uses 
financial assets that have inadvertently come into his possession shall 
be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 142
Unlawful 
abstraction of 
energy
1 Any person who unlawfully obtains energy from an installation that 
serves to exploit natural power, and in particular an electrical installa-
tion shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 If the offender acts for his own or for another's unlawful gain, a 
custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to monetary penalty 
shall be imposed.
Art. 143
Data theft
1 Any person who for his own or for another's unlawful gain obtains 
for himself or another data that is stored or transmitted electronically 
or in some similar manner and which is not intended for him and has 
been specially secured to prevent his access shall be liable to a custo-
dial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
2 The unauthorised obtaining of data to the detriment of a relative or 
family member is prosecuted only on complaint.
Art. 143bis  
Unauthorised 
access to a data 
processing 
system
1 Any person who obtains unauthorised access by means of data 
transmission equipment to a data processing system that has been 
specially secured to prevent his access shall be liable on complaint to 
a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penal-
ty.
2 Any person who markets or makes accessible passwords, programs 
or other data that he knows or must assume are intended to be used to 
commit an offence under paragraph 1 shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 144
Criminal damage
1 Any person who damages, destroys or renders unusable property 
belonging to another or in respect of which another has a right of use 
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 If the offender has committed criminal damage in the course of a 
public riot, he shall be prosecuted ex officio.
3 If the offender has caused major damage, a custodial sentence not 
exceeding five years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed. The 
offence is prosecuted ex officio.  
Art. 144bis
Damage to data
1.  Any person who without authority alters, deletes or renders unusa-
ble data that is stored or transmitted electronically or in some other 
similar way shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
If the offender has caused major damage, a custodial sentence not 
exceeding five years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed. The 
offence is prosecuted ex officio.  
2.  Any person who manufactures, imports, markets, advertises, offers 
or otherwise makes accessible programs that he knows or must as-
sume will be used for the purposes described in paragraph 1 above, or 
provides instructions on the manufacture of such programs shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
If the offender acts for commercial gain, a custodial sentence of from 
six months to ten years shall be imposed.  
Art. 145
Misappropriation 
and removal of 
property subject 
to a pledge or 
lien
Any debtor who, with the intention of causing loss to his creditors, 
appropriates, uses without authority, damages, destroys, reduces the 
value of or renders unusable property subject to a pledge or lien shall 
be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 146
Fraud
1 Any person who with a view to securing an unlawful gain for him-
self or another wilfully induces an erroneous belief in another person 
by false pretences or concealment of the truth, or wilfully reinforces 
an erroneous belief, and thus causes that person to act to the prejudice 
of his or another's financial interests, shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
2 If the offender acts for commercial gain, a custodial sentence of from 
six months to ten years shall be imposed. 
3 Fraud to the detriment of a relative or family member is prosecuted 
only on complaint.
Art. 147
Computer fraud
1 Any person who with a view to his own or another's unlawful gain, 
by the incorrect, incomplete or unauthorised use of data, or in a simi-
lar way, influences the electronic or similar processing or transmission 
of data and as a result causes the transfer of financial assets, thus 
occasioning loss to another, or immediately thereafter conceals such a 
transfer shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years 
or to a monetary penalty.
2 If the offender acts for commercial gain, a custodial sentence of from 
six months to ten years shall be imposed. 
3 Computer fraud to the detriment of a relative or family member is 
prosecuted only on complaint.
Art. 148
Misuse of a 
cheque card or 
credit card
1 Any person who with a view to obtaining services of a financial 
value and although incapable of making or unwilling to make payment 
uses a cheque card or credit card or similar means of payment that has 
been entrusted to him by the issuer thereof and thus causes loss to the 
issuer, shall be liable, provided the issuer and the contracting enter-
prise have taken reasonable measures in order to prevent the abuse of 
the card, to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
2 If the offender acts for commercial gain, a custodial sentence of from 
six months to ten years shall be imposed. 
Art. 148a 
Unlawful claim 
for social 
insurance or 
social assistance 
benefits
1 Any person who misleads a another by providing false or incomplete 
information, failing to disclose information or in any other way or 
who compounds an existing error so that he or an associate obtains 
social insurance or social assistance benefits to which he or his associ-
ate is not entitled shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
one year or to monetary penalty.
2 In minor cases, the penalty is a fine.
Art. 149
Making off from 
a hotel, restau-
rant or bar 
without payment
Any person who accepts accommodation, food or drink or other 
services in a hotel, restaurant, bar or similar premises and dishonestly 
makes off without making payment therefor shall be liable on com-
plaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
Art. 150
Obtaining a 
service without 
payment
Any person who obtains a service without paying, knowing that the 
service is only rendered against payment, and in particular
makes use of public transport,
attends public performances, exhibitions or similar events,
or obtains services from a data processing device or a vending ma-
chine,
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 150bis  
Production and 
marketing of 
equipment for 
the unauthorised 
decoding of 
encoded services
1 Any person who manufactures, imports, exports, transports, markets 
or installs equipment, the components or data processing programs of 
which are designed and are suitable for the unauthorised decoding of 
encoded television or radio programmes or telecommunications ser-
vices shall be liable on complaint to a fine. 
2 An attempt to commit the foregoing offence or complicity in the 
same is also an offence.
Art. 151
Maliciously 
causing financial 
loss to another
Any person who without a view to gain, by making representations or 
suppressing information, wilfully misleads another or wilfully rein-
forces an erroneous belief with the result that the person in error acts 
in such a way that he or another incurs a financial loss shall be liable 
on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 152
False statements 
about commer-
cial business
Any person who, whether as founder, proprietor, partner with unlim-
ited liability, authorised representative or member of the management 
board or the board of directors, or as an auditor or liquidator of a 
trading company, a co-operative or any other enterprise which carries 
on commercial business,
makes or causes to be made to all the company members, partners or 
co-operative members, or to the participants in any other commercial 
enterprise a false or incomplete statement of substantial significance 
by means of a public announcement or notice, report or presentation 
that could cause another to dispose of his own assets in such a way 
that he sustains financial loss,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 153
False statements 
to the commer-
cial register 
authorities
Any person who causes an authority responsible for the Commercial 
Register to make a false entry in the Register or withholds from such 
an authority information which is required to be entered in the Regis-
ter shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or 
to a monetary penalty.
Art. 154 
Criminal liability 
of members of 
the board of 
directors and the 
executive board 
of companies 
whose shares are 
listed on a stock 
exchange
1 Any person who, as a member of the board of directors or the execu-
tive board of a company whose shares are listed on a stock exchange, 
pays or accepts remuneration that is not permitted in terms of Article 
735c letters 1, 5 and 6 of the Code of Obligations (CO) , if applica-
ble in conjunction with Article 735d number 1 CO, shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years and to a monetary penal-
ty.
2 Any person who, as a member of the board of directors of a compa-
ny whose shares are listed on a stock exchange, carries out any of the 
following acts shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty:
a. 	delegating the management of business wholly or partly to a 
legal entity in violation of Article 716b paragraph 2 first sen-
tence CO;
b.	delegating the voting rights of corporate bodies or delegating 
voting rights to custodian banks (Art. 689b para. 2 CO);
c.	preventing:
1.	the articles of association from containing the provisions 
specified in Article 626 paragraph 2 letters 1 and 2 CO,
2.	the general meeting from being able, annually and indi-
vidually, to elect the members and the chair of the board 
of directors, the members of the remuneration committee 
and the independent voting representative (Art. 698 para. 
2 no 2 and para. 3 no 1-3 CO),
3. 	the general meeting from being able to vote on the remu-
neration that the board of directors has determined for it-
self, the executive board and the board of advisors (Art. 
698 para. 3 no 4 CO),
4.	the shareholders or their representatives from being able 
to exercise their rights by electronic means (Art. 689c pa-
ra. 6 CO).
3 If the perpetrator merely accepts the possibility that an offence under 
paragraph 1 or 2 may be committed, he or she shall not be liable to 
prosecution under these provisions.
4 In calculating the monetary penalty, the court shall not be bound by 
the maximum value of a daily penalty unit (Art. 34 para. 2 first sen-
tence); however, the monetary penalty may not exceed six times the 
annual remuneration agreed with the company concerned at the time 
of the offence.
Art. 155
Counterfeiting of 
goods
1.  Any person who with a view to deceiving another in trade or busi-
ness
manufactures a product which appears to have a higher commercial 
value than its true commercial value, in particular by being an imita-
tion or counterfeit version of another product,
or imports, stores or markets such a product,
shall be liable, provided the act is not subject to a more severe penalty 
under another provision hereof, to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender acts for commercial gain, unless the act is subject to 
a more severe penalty under another provision hereof, a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or a monetary penalty shall be 
imposed. 
Art. 156
Extortion
1.  Any person who, with a view to securing an unlawful gain for 
himself or for another, induces another person by using violence or the 
threat of seriously detrimental consequences to behave in such a way 
that he or another sustains financial loss shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender acts for commercial gain, or if he repeatedly com-
mits the offence against the same person, a custodial sentence of from 
six months to ten years shall be imposed. 
3.  If the offender uses violence against another or if he threatens 
another with an immediate danger to life and limb, a penalty in ac-
cordance with Article 140 hereof shall be imposed.
4.  If the offender threatens to endanger the life and limb of a large 
number of persons or to cause serious damage to property in which 
there is a substantial public interest, he shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence of not less than one year .
Art. 157
Profiteering
1.  Any person who for his own or another's financial gain or the 
promise of such gain, exploits the position of need, the dependence, 
the weakness of mind or character, the inexperience, or the foolishness 
of another person to obtain a payment or service which is clearly 
disproportionate to the consideration given in return,
any person who acquires a debt originating from an act of profiteering 
and sells or enforces the same,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender acts for commercial gain, a custodial sentence of 
from six months to ten years shall be imposed. 
Art. 158
Criminal 
mismanagement
1.  Any person who by law, an official order, a legal transaction or 
authorisation granted to him, has been entrusted with the management 
of the property of another or the supervision of such management, and 
in the course of and in breach of his duties causes or permits that other 
person to sustain financial loss shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Any person who acts in the same manner in his capacity as the man-
ager of a business but without specific instructions shall be liable to 
the same penalty.
If the offender acts with a view to securing an unlawful financial gain 
for himself or another, a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or 
to monetary penalty shall be imposed. 
2.  Any person who, with a view to securing an unlawful gain for 
himself or another, abuses the authority granted to him by statute, an 
official order or a legal transaction to act on behalf of another and as a 
result causes that other person to sustain financial loss shall be liable 
to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary 
penalty.
3.  Criminal mismanagement to the detriment of a relative or family 
member is prosecuted only on complaint.
Art. 159
Misuse of salary 
deductions
Any employer who breaches his obligation to make use of a deduction 
from an employee's salary for the payment of taxes, duties, insurance 
premiums or contributions or in any other way for the benefit of the 
employee and thus causes loss to the employee shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 160
Handling stolen 
goods
1. Any person who takes possession of, accepts as a gift or as the 
subject of a pledge, conceals, or assists in the disposal of goods which 
he knows or must assume have been acquired by way of an offence 
against property shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
five years or to a monetary penalty.
The offender shall be liable to the penalty applicable to the original 
offence if that penalty is reduced.
If the original offence is prosecuted only on complaint, the handling of 
stolen goods is prosecuted only if a complaint has been made in re-
spect of the original offence.
2.  If the offender acts for commercial gain, a custodial sentence of 
from six months to ten years shall be imposed. 
Art. 161 
Art. 161bis  
Art. 162
2. Breach of 
manufacturing or 
trade secrecy
Any person who betrays a manufacturing or trade secret that he is 
under a statutory or contractual duty contract not to reveal,
any person who exploits for himself or another such a betrayal,
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 163
3. Bankruptcy 
and debt 
collection 
felonies or 
misdemeanours
Fraudulent 
bankruptcy and 
fraud against 
seizure
1.  Any debtor who fictitiously reduces his assets to the prejudice of 
his creditors, and in particular
disposes of or conceals assets,
creates fictitious debts,
accepts fictitious claims as valid or arranges for the enforcement of 
such claims,
shall be liable, if bankruptcy proceedings are commenced against him 
or a certificate of unsatisfied claims has been issued in his respect, to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  Subject to the same requirements, any third party who carries out 
any of the foregoing acts to the prejudice of creditors shall be liable a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 164
Reduction of 
assets to the 
prejudice of 
creditors
1.  Any debtor who reduces his assets to the detriment of his creditors 
by
damaging, destroying or reducing the value of any assets or rendering 
them unusable,
disposing of any assets for no consideration or for a consideration that 
is clearly negligible in value,
or by waiving, without material grounds, any rights which may accrue 
thereon or by renouncing rights for no consideration,
shall be liable, if bankruptcy proceedings are commenced against him 
or a certificate of unsatisfied claims has been issued in his respect, to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  Subject to the same requirements, any third party who carries out 
any of the foregoing acts to the prejudice of creditors shall be liable to 
a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penal-
ty.
Art. 165
Mismanagement
1.  Any debtor who in a manner other than that in Article 164 through 
mismanagement, in particular through inadequate capital provision, 
excessive expenditure, hazardous speculation, the negligent granting 
or use of credit, the squandering of assets or gross negligence in the 
exercise of his profession or the management of his assets,
causes or aggravates his excessive indebtedness, causes his insolvency 
or, in the knowledge that he is unable to pay, prejudices his financial 
situation,
shall be liable, if bankruptcy proceedings are commenced against him 
or a certificate of unsatisfied claims is issued in his respect, to a custo-
dial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
1bis.  If the debtor receives official support to avert imminent over-
indebtedness or insolvency, he shall be liable to the same penalty. 
2.  Any debtor whose assets have been seized is prosecuted solely on 
the complaint of a creditor who has obtained a certificate of unsatis-
fied claims against him.
The complaint must be filed within three months of receipt of the 
certificate of unsatisfied claims.
Any creditor who has induced a debtor to incur irresponsible debts, 
unreasonable expenditure or to enter into hazardously speculative 
transactions, or who has exploited the debtor usuriously, is barred 
from filing a complaint.
Art. 166
Failure to keep 
proper accounts
Any debtor who fails to comply with a statutory obligation to which 
he is subject to keep and preserve business accounts or draw up a 
balance sheet, with the result that his financial position is not or not 
fully ascertainable, shall be liable, if bankruptcy proceedings are 
commenced against him or a certificate of unsatisfied claims has been 
issued in his respect following a seizure of assets in accordance with 
Article 43 of the Federal Act of 11 April 1889  on Debt Enforce-
ment and Bankruptcy (DEBA), to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 167
Undue prefer-
ence to creditors
Any debtor who, in the knowledge of his inability to pay and with a 
view to showing preference to some of his creditors to the prejudice of 
others, acts in order to achieve such an aim, and in particular pays 
debts that are not due for payment, pays due debts in a way that differs 
from the normal methods, or provides security for a debt from his own 
means when he is not obliged to do so, shall be liable, if bankruptcy 
proceedings are commenced against him or a certificate of unsatisfied 
claims has been issued in his respect, to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 168  
Subornation in 
enforcement 
proceedings
Any person who:
a.	gives or promises a creditor or his representative special ad-
vantages in order to obtain his vote at the creditors' meeting or 
on the creditors' committee, or to obtain his consent to or re-
jection of a judicial composition agreement;
b.	gives or promises the administrator in bankruptcy, a member 
of the bankruptcy administration, the Commissioner, or the 
liquidator special advantages in order to influence his deci-
sions;
c.	causes another to give or promise advantages specified in let-
ter a or b,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 169
Disposal of 
seized assets
Any person who without proper authority and to the prejudice of his 
creditors disposes of an asset
that has been officially seized or attached,
that has been officially recorded in debt recovery, bankruptcy or 
retention proceedings, or
that forms part of property that has been ceded in a liquidation settle-
ment
or damages, destroys, reduces the value of, or renders unusable such 
an asset,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 170
Obtaining a 
judicial composi-
tion agreement 
by fraud
Any debtor who misleads his creditors, the Commissioner, or the debt 
collection authorities, in particular by false accounting or drawing up a 
false balance sheet, in order to obtain a moratorium of debt enforce-
ment or the approval of a judicial composition agreement,
any third party who acts in the foregoing manner for the benefit of the 
debtor,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 171
Judicial compo-
sition agreement
1 Articles 163 paragraph 1, 164 paragraph 1, 165 paragraph 1, 166 and 
167 also apply in the event that a judicial composition agreement has 
been approved and adopted.
2 ... 
Art. 171bis  
Art. 172 
4. General 
provisions
...

Art. 172bis 
Art. 172ter
Minor offences 
against property
1 Where the offence relates only to a minor asset value or where only a 
minor loss is incurred, the offender shall be liable on complaint to a 
fine.
2 This provision does not apply to aggravated theft (Art. 139 nos 2  
and 3), robbery or extortion.

Title Three: 
Offences against Personal Honour and in Breach of 
Secrecy or Privacy 
Art. 173 
1. Offence 
against personal 
honour
Defamation
1.  Any person who in addressing a third party, makes an accusation 
against or casts suspicion on another of dishonourable conduct or of 
other conduct that shall be liable to damage another's reputation,
any person who disseminates such accusations or suspicions,
shall be liable on complaint to a monetary penalty. 
2.  If the accused proves that the statement made or disseminated by 
him corresponds to the truth or that he had substantial grounds to hold 
an honest belief that it was true, he is not liable to a penalty.
3.  The accused is not permitted to lead evidence in support of and is 
criminally liable for statements that are made or disseminated with the 
primary intention of accusing someone of disreputable conduct with-
out there being any public interest or any other justified cause, and 
particularly where such statements refer to a person's private or family 
life.
4.  If the offender recants his statement, the court may impose a more 
lenient penalty or no penalty at all.
5.  If the accused is unable to prove the truth of his statement, or if it is 
shown to be untrue, or if the accused recants his statement, the court 
must state this in its judgment or in another document.
Art. 174
Wilful defama-
tion
1.  A person in addressing a third party, and knowing his allegations to 
be untrue, makes an accusation against or casts suspicion on another 
of dishonourable conduct, or of other conduct that shall be liable to 
damage another's reputation,
any person who disseminates such accusations or suspicions, knowing 
them to be untrue,
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender has acted systematically to undermine the good 
reputation of another, a custodial sentence of from one month to three 
years or a monetary penalty of not less than 30 daily penalty units 
shall be imposed. 
3.  If the offender recants his statement before the court on the 
grounds that it is untrue, the court may impose a more lenient penalty. 
The court must provide the person harmed with a document confirm-
ing the recantation.
Art. 175
Defamation of a 
deceased person 
or of a person 
missing pre-
sumed dead
1 If the defamation, whether wilful or not, is directed at a person who 
is deceased or who has been declared missing presumed dead, the 
relatives of the deceased person or the person missing presumed dead 
are entitled to apply for prosecution.
2 No offence is committed if, at the time of the statement being made, 
the deceased person has been dead or the missing person missing for 
more than 30 years.
Art. 176
General provi-
sion
Verbal defamation, whether wilful or not, is regarded as the equivalent 
of defamatory statements made in writing, in pictures, by gestures or 
in any other manner.
Art. 177
Insult
1 Any person who attacks the honour of another verbally, in writing, in 
pictures, through gestures or through acts of aggression shall be liable 
on complaint to a monetary penalty not exceeding 90 daily penalty 
units. 
2 If the insulted party has directly provoked the insult by improper 
behaviour, the court may dispense with imposing a penalty on the 
offender.
3 If there is an immediate response to the insult by way of a retaliatory 
insult or act of aggression, the court may dispense with imposing a 
penalty on either or both offenders.
Art. 178
Limitation
1 The right to prosecute misdemeanours against personal honour is 
subject to a limitation period of four years. 
2 Article 31 applies to the expiry of the right to file a complaint. 
Art. 179
2.  Offences in 
breach of 
privacy or 
secrecy
Breach of the 
privacy of a 
sealed document
Any person who without authority opens a sealed document or sealed 
mail in order to obtain knowledge of its content,
any person who disseminates or makes use of information he has 
obtained by opening a sealed document or sealed mail that was not 
intended for him,
shall be liable on complaint to a fine.
Art. 179bis  
Listening in on 
and recording 
the conversations 
of others
Any person who by using a listening device and without the permis-
sion of all those participating, listens in on a private conversation 
between other persons, or records such a conversation on a recording 
device,
any person who makes use of information that he knows or must 
assume has come to his knowledge as the result of an offence under 
the above paragraph or makes such information known to a third 
party,
any person who stores or allows a third party access to a recording that 
he knows or must assume has been made as the result of an offence 
under paragraph 1 above,
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 179ter  
Unauthorised 
recording of 
conversations
Any person who, as a participant in a private conversation, records the 
conversation on a recording device without the permission of the other 
participants,
any person who stores or makes use of a recording or makes the 
recording available to a third party when he knows or must assume 
that the recording has been made as the result of an offence under 
paragraph 1 above
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding one 
year or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 179quater  
Breach of 
secrecy or 
privacy through 
the use of an 
image-carrying 
device
Any person who observes with a recording device or records with an 
image-carrying device information from the secret domain of another 
or information which is not automatically accessible from the private 
domain of another,
any person who makes use of information or makes information 
known to a third party, which he knows or must assume has been 
produced as a result of an offence under paragraph 1 above,
any person who stores or allows a third party access to a recording that 
he knows or must assume has been made as the result of an offence 
under paragraph 1 above,
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 179quinquies  
Legal recordings
1 Persons who as participants in the conversation or subscribers to a 
participating line record calls:
a.	to the emergency, rescue or security services; or
b.	in the course of business that have orders, assignments, reser-
vations and similar transactions as their subject matter.
are not liable to a penalty under Article 179bis paragraph 1 or Article 
179ter paragraph 1.
2 Article 179bis paragraphs 2 and 3 and 179ter paragraph 2 apply by 
analogy to the use of.
2 Recordings in accordance with paragraph 1 above may only be used 
for the purpose of providing evidence. 
Art. 179sexies  
Marketing and 
promotion of 
devices for 
unlawful 
listening or 
sound or image 
recording
1.  Any person who manufactures, imports, exports, acquires, stores, 
possesses, transports, passes on to another, sells, leases, lends or in 
any other manner markets, promotes or provides instruction on the 
manufacture of technical devices which are in particular intended for 
unlawful listening or the unlawful making of sound or image record-
ings,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender acts on behalf of a third party, that third party shall 
be liable to the same penalty as the offender provided he was aware 
that the offence was being committed and failed to use his best efforts 
to prevent the commission of the offence.
If the third party is a legal entity, a general or limited partnership or a 
sole proprietorship , paragraph 1 above applies to those persons who 
acted or should have acted on behalf of that entity.
Art. 179septies  
Misuse of a 
telecommunica-
tions installation
Any person who uses a telecommunications installation in order to 
cause distress to or harass another, shall be liable on complaint to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding one year or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 179octies  
Official surveil-
lance, exempted 
acts
1 Any person who, in the exercise of express statutory powers, orders 
or carries out the surveillance of the post or telecommunications of 
another or makes use of technical surveillance devices (Art. 179bis ff.) 
does not commit an offence provided that the approval of the appro-
priate court is obtained without delay.
2 ... 
Art. 179novies  
Obtaining 
personal data 
without authori-
sation
Any person who without authorisation obtains personal data that are 
particularly sensitive and that are not publicly accessible shall be 
liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years 
or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 179decies  
Identity theft
Any person who uses the identity of another person without his or her 
consent in order to harm that person or in order to obtain an unlawful 
advantage for himself or herself or another shall be liable on com-
plaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding one year or to a monetary 
penalty.

Title Four: Felonies and Misdemeanours against Liberty
Art. 180
Threatening 
behaviour
1 Any person who places another in a state of fear and alarm by mak-
ing a serious threat shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 The offender is prosecuted ex officio if he:
a.	is the spouse of the victim and the threat was made during the 
marriage or within one year of divorce; or
abis. 	is the registered partner of the victim and the threat was 
made during the registered partnership or within one year of 
its dissolution; or
b.	is the heterosexual or homosexual partner of the victim, pro-
vided they are cohabiting for an unlimited period and the 
threat was made during this time or within one year of separa-
tion. 
Art. 181
Coercion
Any person who, by the use of force or the threat of serious detriment 
or other restriction of another's freedom to act compels another to 
carry out an act, to fail to carry out an act or to tolerate an act, shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
Art. 181a 
Forced marriage, 
forced registered 
partnership
1 Any person who, by the use of force or the threat of serious detri-
ment or other restriction of another's freedom to act compels another 
to enter into a marriage or to have a same-sex partnership registered 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2 Any person who commits the foregoing offence abroad but is now in 
Switzerland and is not being extradited shall be liable to the same 
penalty. Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 apply.
Art. 182 
Trafficking in 
human beings
1 Any person who as a supplier, intermediary or customer engages in 
the trafficking of a human being for the purpose of sexual exploita-
tion, exploitation of his or her labour or for the purpose of removing 
an organ shall be liable to a custodial sentence or to a monetary penal-
ty. The soliciting of a person for these purposes is equivalent to traf-
ficking.
2 If the victim is a minor  or if the offender acts for commercial gain, 
the penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than one year.
3 ... 
4 Any person who commits the act abroad is also guilty of an offence. 
Articles 5 and 6 apply.
Art. 183 
False imprison-
ment and 
abduction
1.  Any person who unlawfully arrests or holds another prisoner or 
otherwise unlawfully deprives another of his liberty,
any person who, by the use of force, false pretences or threats, abducts 
another,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  Any person who abducts a person who is incapable of judgement 
or resistance or who is under the age of sixteen, shall be liable the 
same penalty.
Art. 184 
Aggravating 
circumstances
The penalty for false imprisonment and abduction is a custodial sen-
tence of not less than one year,
if the offender attempts to obtain a ransom,
if he treats the victim with cruelty,
if the deprivation of liberty lasts for a period in excess of ten days or
if the health of the victim is seriously endangered.
Art. 185 
Hostage taking
1.  Any person who deprives another of his liberty, or abducts or 
otherwise seizes another in order to coerce a third party to carry out an 
act, abstain from carrying out an act or tolerate an act,
any person who exploits a situation created in the foregoing manner 
by another in order so to coerce a third party,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one year.
2.  The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years if 
the offender threatens to kill or seriously injure the victim or to treat 
the victim with cruelty.
3.  In particularly serious cases, and in particular if the act involves 
several victims, the offender shall be liable to a custodial sentence of 
life.
4.  If the offender abandons the coercion and releases the victim, a 
reduced penalty may be imposed (Art. 48a). 
5.  Any person who commits the offence abroad is also liable to the 
foregoing penalties provided he is arrested in Switzerland and not 
extradited. Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 apply. 
Art. 185bis  
Enforced 
disappearance
1 Any person who with the intention of removing a person from the 
protection of the law for a prolonged period of time:
a.	on behalf of or with the acquiescence of a State or political 
organisation, deprives that person of their liberty, and thereaf-
ter refuses to give information as to their fate or whereabouts; 
or
b.	on behalf of or with the acquiescence of a State or political 
organisation or in violation of a legal duty refuses to give in-
formation as to the fate or whereabouts of the person con-
cerned.
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one year.
2 Any person who commits the offence abroad is also liable to the 
foregoing penalty provided they are now in Switzerland and are not 
extradited. Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 apply.
Art. 186
Unlawful entry
Any person who, against the will of the lawful occupants enters a 
building, an apartment, a self-contained room within a building, an 
enclosed area, courtyard or garden forming a direct part of a building, 
or a clearly demarcated workplace or, despite requests from the lawful 
occupants to leave, remains in such a location, shall be liable on 
complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.

Title Five:  Offences against Sexual Integrity
Art. 187
1. Sexual acts 
with children 
1.  Any person who engages in a sexual act with a child under 16 
years of age, or,
incites a child to commit such an act, or
involves a child in a such an act,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty. 
1bis.  If the child is under the age of 12 and if the offender engages in a 
sexual act with the child or causes the child to engage in a sexual act 
with another person or with an animal, a custodial sentence of be-
tween one and five years shall be imposed. 
2.  No penalty may be imposed if the difference in age between the 
persons involved does not exceed three years.
3.  If the offender has not reached the age of 20 at the time of the act 
or the first of the acts, and if there are special circumstances, the 
responsible authority may dispense with prosecution, referral to court 
or the imposition of a penalty. 
4.  If the offender acts under the misconception that the child is 16 
years of age or older, but they would not have made this error had they 
exercised due care, a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a 
monetary penalty shall be imposed.
5.  ... 
6.  ... 
Art. 188 
2. Offences 
against sexual 
liberty and 
integrity.
Sexual acts with 
dependent 
persons
Any person who commits a sexual act by exploiting his or her rela-
tionship with a minor of at least 16 years of age who is dependent on 
them due to a relationship arising from the minor's education, care or 
employment or another form of dependent relationship,
any person who encourages such a minor to commit a sexual act by 
exploiting such a relationship,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 189 
Sexual abuse and 
indecent assault
1 Any person who, against the will of another person, performs a 
sexual act on that person or has that person perform such an act on 
them or who exploits that person's state of shock to that end shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
2 Any person who uses threats, force or psychological pressure on 
another person or makes that other person incapable of resistance in 
order to compel that person to carry out or tolerate a sexual act shall 
be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding ten years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
3 If the offender acts with cruelty, and if in particular they make use of 
an offensive weapon or any other dangerous object, the penalty is a 
custodial sentence of not less than one year.
Art. 190 
Rape
1 Any person who, against the will of another person, has sexual 
intercourse with that person, commits an act with that person similar 
to sexual intercourse involving penetration of the body, or who has 
that person perform such an act or who exploits that person's state of 
shock to that end shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
five years.
2 Any person who forces another person to engage in or tolerate sexual 
intercourse or an act similar to sexual intercourse involving penetra-
tion of the body by using threats or violence, psychological pressure 
or by being made incapable of resistance shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence of from one to ten years.
3 If the offender in paragraph 2 acts with cruelty, and if they make use 
of an offensive weapon or any other dangerous object, the penalty 
shall be a custodial sentence of not less than three years.
Art. 191 
Abuse of persons 
incapable of 
proper judge-
ment or re-
sistance
Any person who has sexual intercourse with, or commits an act simi-
lar to sexual intercourse or any other sexual act with a person who is 
incapable of proper judgement or resistance shall be liable to a custo-
dial sentence not exceeding ten years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 192 
Art. 193 
Exploitation of a 
person in a 
position of need 
or dependency
Any person who induces another to commit or submit to a sexual act 
by exploiting a position of need or a dependent relationship based on 
employment or another dependent relationship shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 193a 
Deception as to 
the sexual 
character of an 
act
Any person who, in exercising a professional or organised extra-
professional activity in the health sector, performs a sexual act on a 
person or has a person perform a sexual act on them and deceives 
them as to the nature of the act or exploits their misconception about 
the nature of the act shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceed-
ing five years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 194 
Indecent conduct
1 Any person who engages in an act of indecent conduct shall be liable 
on complaint to a fine.
2 In serious cases, a monetary penalty shall be imposed. The offence 
shall be prosecuted on complaint.
3 If the accused undergoes medical treatment as ordered by the compe-
tent authority, the criminal proceedings shall be discontinued.
Art. 195 
3. Exploitation 
of sexual acts
Encouraging 
prostitution
Any person who:
a. 	induces a minor into prostitution or encourages a minor to en-
gage in prostitution with the intention of securing a financial 
advantage
b. 	induces a person into prostitution by exploiting that person's 
dependency or with the intention of securing a financial ad-
vantage,
c. 	restricts the freedom to act of a prostitute by supervising them 
in the course of their activities or by exercising control over 
the location, time, volume or other aspects of their work as a 
prostitute or,
d. 	makes a person remain a prostitute against their will,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding ten years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 196 
Sexual acts with 
minors against 
payment
Any person who carries out sexual acts with a minor or induces a 
minor to carry out such acts and who makes or promises payment in 
return shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years 
or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 197 
4. Pornography
1 Any person who offers, shows, passes on or makes accessible to a 
person under the age of 16 pornographic documents, sound or visual 
recordings, depictions or other items of a similar nature or porno-
graphic performances, or broadcasts any of the same on radio or 
television shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty.
2.  Any person who exhibits in public items or recordings as described 
in paragraph 1 above or shows or otherwise offers the same unsolicit-
ed to others shall be liable to a fine. Any person who, in advance, 
draws the attention of visitors to private exhibitions or performances 
to their pornographic character does not commit an offence.
3 Any person who recruits or causes a minor to participate in a porno-
graphic performance shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceed-
ing three years or to a monetary penalty.
4 Any person who produces, imports, stores, markets, advertises, 
exhibits, offers, shows, passes on or makes accessible to others, ac-
quires, or procures or possesses via electronic media or otherwise 
items or recordings as described in paragraph 1 above that contain 
sexual acts involving animals or non-genuine sexual acts with minors 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty. 
If the items or recordings contain genuine sexual acts with minors, the 
penalty is a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or a monetary 
penalty. 
5 Any person who consumes or who for their own consumption pro-
duces, imports, stores, acquires or procures or possesses via electronic 
media or otherwise items or recordings as described in paragraph 1 
above that contain sexual acts involving animals or non-genuine 
sexual acts with minors shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding one year or to a monetary penalty. 
If the items or recordings contain genuine sexual acts with minors, a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed. 
6 In the case of offences under paragraphs 4 and 5, the items shall be 
forfeited.
7 ... 
8 Any person who produces, possesses or consumes items or record-
ings as described in paragraph 1 above involving a minor or makes 
such items or recordings accessible to the person shown shall not 
commit an offence provided:
a.	the minor has consented;
b.	the person producing the image or performance does not make 
or promise to make any payment therefor; and
c.	the difference in age between the participants does not exceed 
three years. 
8bis It shall not be an offence for a minor to produce, possess or con-
sume items or recordings as described in paragraph 1 or to make the 
same accessible to another person with that person's consent.
The person who makes these items or recordings accessible shall not 
commit an offence by possessing and consuming them provided:
a.	they do not make or promise to make payment therefor;
b.	the participants know each other; and
c.	the participants are adults or, if at least one of them is a minor, 
the difference in age between them does not exceed three 
years. 
9 Items or recordings as described in paragraphs 1-5 above are not 
regarded as pornographic if they have a cultural or scientific value that 
justifies their protection by law.
Art. 197a 
5. Unauthorised 
passing on of 
private sexual 
content
1 Any person who passes on private sexual content, in particular 
documents, sound or visual recordings, depictions or other items or 
performances, without the consent of the person recognisable therein, 
shall on complaint be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding one 
year or to a monetary penalty. 
2 If the offender has published the content, a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 198 
6. Contraven-
tions against 
sexual integrity
Sexual harass-
ment
1 Any person who causes offence by performing a sexual act in the 
presence of another who does not expect it,
any person who sexually harasses another physically or through the 
use of indecent language, writings or images
shall be liable on complaint to a fine.
2 The competent authority may require the person concerned to attend 
a course. If they complete the required course successfully, the pro-
ceedings shall be discontinued.
3 The competent authority shall decide on the procedural costs and on 
any claims made by the civil party.
Art. 199
Unauthorised 
practice of 
prostitution
Any person who violates the cantonal regulations on the permitted 
locations or times at which prostitution may be practised or the man-
ner in which it may be practised, or on the prevention of related public 
nuisance shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 200 
7. Joint commis-
sion
Where any person commits an offence under this Title jointly with one 
or more others, the court shall increase the penalty imposed, but may 
not exceed the standard maximum penalty for the offence by more 
than an additional half. The court, in imposing the penalty, is bound 
by the statutory maximum penalty for the type offence in question.
Art. 201-212 

Title Six: Felonies and Misdemeanours against the Family
Art. 213 
Incest
1 Any person who has sexual intercourse with a blood relative in direct 
line or with a brother or sister, or a half-brother or half-sister shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
2 Minors are not liable to any penalty provided they have been induced 
to commit the act.
3 ... 
Art. 214 
Art. 215 
Bigamy
Any person who marries or enters into a registered same-sex partner-
ship when he is already married or living in a registered same-sex 
partnership,
any person who marries or enters into a registered same-sex partner-
ship with a person who is already married or living in a registered 
same-sex partnership,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 216 
Art. 217 
Neglect of duty 
to support the 
family
1 Any person who fails to fulfil his or her family law duties to provide 
maintenance or support although he or she has or could have the 
means to do so, shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 The authorities and agencies appointed by the cantons also have the 
right to file a complaint. In exercising this right, they shall take ac-
count of the interests of the family.
Art. 218 
Art. 219 
Neglect of duties 
of care, supervi-
sion or education
1 Any person who violates or neglects his or her duties of supervision 
and education towards a minor and thus endangers the minor's physi-
cal or mental development, shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed.   
Art. 220 
Abduction of 
minors
Any person who removes a minor from or refuses to return a minor to 
the person holding the right to decide on the minor's place of residence 
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.

Title Seven: 
Felonies and Misdemeanours constituting a Public Danger
Art. 221
Arson
1 Any person who wilfully causes a fire and thus does damage to 
another or causes a danger to the public shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence of not less than one year.
2 If the offender wilfully endangers the life and limb of others, the 
penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years.
3 If the damage caused is minor, the penalty may be reduced to a 
custodial sentence of up to three years or to a monetary penalty. 
Art. 222
Negligent arson
1 Any person who causes a fire through negligence and thus does 
damage to another or causes a danger to the public shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding one year or to a monetary penalty. 
2 If the offender through negligence endangers the life and limb of 
others, a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a monetary 
penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 223
Causing an 
explosion
1.  Any person who wilfully causes an explosion involving gas, petrol, 
paraffin or a similar substance and thus knowingly endangers the life 
and limb or property of others shall be liable to a custodial sentence of 
not less than one year. 
If only minor loss, damage or injury is caused, a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty may be imposed.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed.
Art. 224
Misuse of 
explosives and 
toxic gases with 
criminal intent
1 Any person who wilfully and with criminal intent endangers the life 
and limb or the property of others through the use of explosives or 
toxic gases shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one 
year.
2 If only an insignificant danger to property is caused, a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty may be 
imposed.
Art. 225 
Misuse of 
explosives or 
toxic gases 
without criminal 
intent or through 
negligence 
1 Any person who wilfully but without criminal intent endangers the 
life and limb or the property of others through the use of explosives or 
toxic gases shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five 
years or to a monetary penalty.
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 226
Manufacture, 
concealment and 
transport of 
explosives and 
toxic gases
1 Any person who manufactures explosives or toxic gases that he 
knows or must assume are intended to be used to commit a felony 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of at least six months and no 
more than ten years. 
2 Any person who procures, passes on to another, accepts from anoth-
er, safeguards, conceals or transports explosives, toxic gases or sub-
stances suitable for their manufacture shall be liable, if he knows or 
must assume that they are intended to be used to commit a felony, to a 
custodial sentence of from one month to five years or to a monetary 
penalty of not less than 30 daily penalty units. 
3 Any person who instructs another person on how to manufacture 
explosives or toxic gases when he knows or must assume that that 
person is planning to use the explosives or toxic gases to commit a 
felony shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from one month to five 
years or to a monetary penalty of not less than 30 daily penalty 
units. 
Art. 226bis  
Causing danger 
by means of 
nuclear energy, 
radioactivity or 
ionising 
radiation
1 Any person who wilfully causes serious danger to the life or the 
health of people or to the property of others by means of nuclear 
energy, radio-active substances or ionising radiation shall be liable to 
a custodial sentence or a monetary penalty.
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sentence not 
exceeding five years or to monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 226ter  
Preparatory 
offences
1 Any person who systematically carries out specific technical or 
organisational preparations for acts intended to cause danger to the life 
or the health of people or to the property of others by means of nuclear 
energy, radioactive substances or ionising radiation of substantial 
value shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or 
to a monetary penalty. 
2 Any person who manufactures, procures, passes on to another, 
accepts from another, stores, conceals or transports radioactive sub-
stances, equipment, apparatus or articles that contain radioactive 
substances or may emit ionising radiation shall be liable, if he knows 
or must assume that they are intended for unlawful use, to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding ten years or to a monetary penalty. 
3 Any person who instructs another person on how to manufacture such 
substances, equipment, apparatus or articles shall be liable, if he knows or 
must assume that they are intended for unlawful use, to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty. 
Art. 227
Causing a flood, 
collapse or 
landslide
1.  Any person who wilfully causes a flood, the collapse of a structure 
or a landslide or rock fall and thus knowingly endangers the life and 
limb of people or the property of others shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence of not less than one year.
If only minor loss, damage or injury is caused, a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty may be imposed.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed.
Art. 228
Criminal damage 
to electrical 
installations, and 
hydraulic or 
protective 
structures
1.  Any person who wilfully damages or destroys electrical installa-
tions, hydraulic structures such as dams, weirs, dikes, and floodgates, 
or structures erected to provide protection against natural forces such 
as landslides or avalanches, and thus knowingly endangers the life and 
limb of people or the property of others, shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence of not less than one year. 
If only minor loss, damage or injury is caused, a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty may be imposed.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed.
Art. 229
Breach of 
construction 
regulations
1 Any person engaged in the management or execution of construction 
or demolition work who wilfully disregards the accepted rules of 
construction and as a result knowingly endangers the life and limb of 
others shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years 
or to a monetary penalty. 
2 If the offender disregards the accepted rules of construction through 
negligence, a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a mone-
tary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 230
Removal or non-
installation of 
safety devices
1.  Any person who wilfully damages, destroys, removes, otherwise 
renders unusable or deactivates a safety device which serves to pre-
vent accidents in a factory or other commercial premises or on a 
machine, 
any person who wilfully fails to install such a device in violation of 
the regulations,
and thus knowingly endangers the life and limb of others,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty. 
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed.

Title Eight:  
Felonies and Misdemeanours against Public Health
Art. 230bis  
Causing danger 
by means of 
genetically 
modified or 
pathogenic 
organisms
1 Any person who wilfully releases genetically modified or pathogenic 
organisms or the disrupts the operation of a facility for the research 
into, or the safeguarding, production or transport of such organisms 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding ten years, provid-
ed he knows or must assume that through his acts:
a.	he will endanger the life and limb of people; or
b.	the natural composition of communities of animals and plants 
or their habitats will be seriously endangered.
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 231 
Transmission of 
human diseases
Any person who maliciously transmits a dangerous communicable 
human disease shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from one to 
five years.
Art. 232
Transmission of 
an epizootic 
disease
1.  Any person who wilfully causes the transmission of an epizootic 
disease among domestic animals shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
If the offender maliciously causes serious loss, damage or injury, the 
penalty is a custodial sentence of from one to five years.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed.
Art. 233
Propagation of 
harmful parasites
1.  Any person who wilfully propagates a parasite or micro-organism 
that constitutes a danger to agriculture or forestry, shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
If the offender maliciously causes serious loss, damage or injury, the 
penalty is a custodial sentence of from one to five years.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed.
Art. 234
Contamination 
of drinking water
1 Any person who wilfully contaminates drinking water intended for 
people or domestic animals with substances that are damaging to 
health shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from one month to five 
years or to a monetary penalty of not less than 30 daily penalty 
units. 
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 235
Production of 
harmful animal 
feed
1.  Any person who wilfully produces or treats animal feed or 
feedstuffs for domestic animals in such a way that they constitute a 
danger to the health of animals shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
If the offender carries on a commercial operation to produce or treat 
animal feed that is harmful to animals, the penalty is a custodial sen-
tence of from one month to three years or a monetary penalty of not 
less than 30 daily penalty units. In such cases, public notice shall be 
given of the conviction. 
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed. 
3.  The products shall be forfeited. They may be rendered harmless or 
destroyed.
Art. 236
Marketing of 
harmful animal 
feed 
1 Any person who wilfully imports, stores, offers for sale or markets 
animal feed or animal feedstuffs that constitute a danger to animals 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty. Public notice is given of the conviction.
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed. 
3 The products are forfeited. They may be rendered harmless or de-
stroyed.

Title Nine: 
Felonies and Misdemeanours against Public Traffic
Art. 237
Disruption of 
public traffic
1.  Any person who wilfully obstructs, disrupts or endangers public 
traffic, in particular traffic on the roads, on water, in the air or on rail 
and as a result knowingly causes danger to the life and limb or proper-
ty of other people shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
five years or to a monetary penalty.
If the offender thus knowingly endangers the life and limb of a large 
number of people, a custodial sentence not exceeding ten years or a 
monetary penalty shall be imposed. 
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed. 
Art. 238 
Art. 239
Disruption of 
public ser-
vices  
1.  Any person who wilfully obstructs, disrupts or endangers the 
operation of a public service and in particular the railway, postal, 
telegraphic or telephone services,
any person who wilfully obstructs, disrupts or endangers the operation 
of a public utility or installation which provides water, light, power or 
heat,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding one year or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed. 

Title Ten: 
Counterfeiting of Money, Official Stamps, Official Marks, 
Weights and Measures
Art. 240
Counterfeiting 
money
1 Any person who counterfeits coins, paper money or banknotes in 
order to pass these off as genuine shall be liable to a custodial sen-
tence of not less than one year.
2 In particularly minor cases, a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
3 The offender is also liable to the foregoing penalties if he committed 
the act abroad, has entered Switzerland and is not being extradited, 
provided the act is also an offence at the place of commission.
Art. 241
Falsification of 
money
1 Any person who alters coins, paper money or bank notes in order to 
pass these off at a value higher than their true value shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence of at least six months and no more than five 
years. 
2 In particularly minor cases, a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 242
Passing or 
tendering 
counterfeit 
money
1 Any person who passes or tenders counterfeit or falsified coins, 
paper money or bank notes as genuine money shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penal-
ty .
2 If the offender, the person instructing him or his agent accepted the 
coins or banknotes on the understanding that they were genuine or not 
falsified, a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a monetary 
penalty shall be imposed.
Art. 243 
Imitation of bank 
notes, coins or 
official stamps 
without intent to 
commit forgery
1 Any person who, without the intention of committing the offence of 
forgery, reproduces or imitates bank notes and thus creates the risk 
that persons or machines will confuse such notes with genuine notes, 
in particular if the overall appearance, one side or the greater part of 
one side of a bank note reproduces or imitates a material and a size 
that is identical or similar to the material and size of the original,
any person who, without the intention of committing the offence of 
forgery, produces objects which in their appearance, weight and size 
are similar to coins in circulation, or which show the nominal value or 
other characteristics of coins which have been officially struck, and 
thus creates the risk that persons or machines will confuse such coins 
with coins which are in circulation,
any person who, without the intention of committing the offence of 
forgery reproduces or imitates official stamps and thus creates the risk 
that such stamps will be confused with genuine stamps,
any person who imports, offers or puts into circulation such objects 
articles,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty. 
2 If the offence is committed through negligence, a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed. 
Art. 244
Import, acquisi-
tion and storage 
of counterfeit 
money
1 Any person who imports, acquires or stores counterfeit or falsified 
coins, paper money or bank notes in order to pass these off as genuine 
or non-falsified shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty. 
2 Any person who imports, acquires or stores such money on a large 
scale shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from one to five years.
Art. 245 
Forgery of 
official stamps
1.  Any person who forges or falsifies official stamps, and in particular 
postage stamps, revenue stamps or fee stamps, in order to pass these 
off as genuine or non-falsified,
any person who gives cancelled official value stamps the appearance 
of being valid in order to pass them off as such,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
The offender is also liable to the foregoing penalties if he committed 
the act abroad, has been arrested in Switzerland and is not being 
extradited, provided the act is also an offence at the place of commis-
sion.
2.  Any person who passes off forged, falsified or cancelled official 
stamps as genuine, non-falsified or valid shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 246 
Forgery of 
official marks
Any person who forges or falsifies an official mark which the authori-
ties affix to an object to confirm the result of an inspection or the 
granting of approval such as hallmarks, or marks stamped on goods by 
meat inspectors, marks stamped by the Federal Office for Customs 
and Border Security, with the intention of passing the mark off as 
genuine,
any person who passes off such forged or falsified marks as genuine 
or non-falsified,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 247
Counterfeiting 
equipment and 
unlawful use of 
equipment
Any person who constructs or acquires equipment for the forgery or 
falsification of coins, paper money, bank notes or official stamps in 
order to make unlawful use of such equipment, 
any person who makes unlawful use of equipment which is used for 
the production of coins, paper money, bank notes or official stamps,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 248
Falsification of 
weights and 
measures
Any person who, in order to deceive others in trade or commerce, 
attaches a false calibration mark to weights and measures, scales or 
other measuring instruments or falsifies an existing calibration mark,
makes alterations to weights and measures, scales or other measuring 
instruments, or
makes use of forged or falsified weights and measures, scales or other 
measuring instruments,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 249 
Forfeiture
1 Forged or falsified coins, paper money, banknotes, official stamps, 
official marks, weights and measures, scales or other measuring in-
struments as well as the counterfeiting equipment is forfeited and 
rendered unusable or destroyed.
2 Banknotes, coins or official stamps that have been reproduced, 
imitated or produced without the intent to commit forgery, but which 
create a risk of confusion, are also forfeited and rendered unusable or 
destroyed.
Art. 250
Foreign currency 
and stamps
The provisions this Title also apply in the case of foreign coins, paper 
money, banknotes and stamps.

Title Eleven: Forgery
Art. 251 
Forgery of a 
document
1. Any person who with a view to causing financial loss or damage to 
the rights of another or in order to obtain an unlawful advantage for 
himself or another,
produces a false document, falsifies a genuine document, uses the 
genuine signature or mark of another to produce a false document, 
falsely certifies or causes to be falsely certified a fact of legal signifi-
cance or,
makes use of a false or falsified document in order to deceive,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  ... 
Art. 252 
Forgery of 
certificates
Any person who with the intention of furthering his own position or 
that of another,
forges or falsifies identity documents, references, or certificates, 
uses such a document in order to deceive another,
or uses a genuine document of this nature but which does not apply to 
him in order to deceive another,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 253
Obtaining a false 
certificate by 
fraud
Any person who by fraudulent means causes a public official or a 
person acting in an official capacity to certify an untrue fact of sub-
stantial legal significance, and in particular to certify a false signature 
or an incorrect copy as genuine, or
any person who makes use of a document obtained by fraud in this 
way in order to deceive another as to the fact certified therein,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 254
Suppression of 
documents
1 Any person who damages, destroys, conceals or misappropriates a 
document over which he has no exclusive right of disposal, with a 
view to causing financial loss or damage to the rights of another or in 
order to obtain an unlawful advantage for himself or another shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary 
penalty.
2 The suppression of documents to the detriment of a relative or family 
member is prosecuted only on complaint.
Art. 255
Official foreign 
documents
Articles 251-254 also apply to official foreign documents.
Art. 256
Moving of 
boundary 
markers
Any person who, with the intention of causing financial loss or dam-
aging the rights of another or of obtaining an unlawful advantage for 
himself or another, removes, moves, renders unrecognisable, falsely 
positions or falsifies a boundary stone or other boundary marker shall 
be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 257
Removal of 
survey points 
and water level 
indicators
Any person who removes, moves, renders unrecognisable or falsely 
positions a public survey point or water level indicator shall be liable 
to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary 
penalty.

Title Twelve: 
Felonies and Misdemeanours against Public Order
Art. 258 
Causing fear and 
alarm among the 
general public
Any person who causes fear and alarm among the general public by 
threatening or feigning a danger to life, limb or property shall be liable 
to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary 
penalty.
Art. 259 
Public incite-
ment to commit 
a felony or act of 
violence
1 Any person who publicly incites others to commit a misdemeanour 
that involves violence against other persons or property or a felony 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty. 
1bis Public incitement to commit genocide (Art. 264), where the inten-
tion is for the act to be carried out exclusively or partly in Switzerland, 
is also an offence if the incitement occurs outside Switzerland. 
2 ... 
Art. 260
Rioting
1 Any person who takes part in a riotous assembly in public in the 
course of which acts of violence are committed against persons and 
property by the use of united force shall be liable to a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 Participants who remove themselves when officially ordered to do so 
are not held to have committed an offence if they have not used vio-
lence or encouraged others to do so.
Art. 260bis  
Acts preparatory 
to the commis-
sion of an 
offence
1 Any person who, in accordance with a plan, carries out specific 
technical or organisational measures, the nature and extent of which 
indicate that the offender intends to commit any of the offences listed 
below shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years 
or to a monetary penalty:
a.	intentional homicide (Art. 111);
b.	murder (Art. 112);
c.	serious assault (Art. 122);
cbis. 	female genital mutilation (Art. 124);
d.	robbery (Art. 140);
e.	false imprisonment and abduction (Art. 183);
f.	hostage taking (Art. 185);
fbis. 	enforced disappearance (Art. 185bis);
g.	arson (Art. 221);
h.	genocide (Art. 264);
i.	crimes against humanity (Art. 264a);
j.	war crimes (Art. 264c-264h). 
2 If the offender, of his own volition, does not complete the preparato-
ry act, he is not liable to any penalty.
3 It is also an offence for any person to carry out a preparatory act 
abroad, provided it was intended to commit the offences in Switzer-
land. Article 3 paragraph 2 applies. 
Art. 260ter  
Criminal or 
terrorist organi-
sation
1 Any person who:
a.	participates in an organisation which pursues the objective of: 
1.	committing violent felonies or securing a financial gain 
by criminal means, or
2.	committing violent felonies aimed at intimidating the 
population or coercing a State or an international organi-
sation to act or refrain from acting; or who
b.	supports such an organisation in its activities.
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding ten years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2 Paragraph 1 letter b does not apply to humanitarian services provid-
ed by an impartial humanitarian organisation, such as the International 
Committee of the Red Cross, in accordance with the common Article 
3 of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 .
3 If the offender exercises a decisive influence within the organisation, 
a custodial sentence of not less than three years shall be imposed.
4 The court has the discretion to mitigate the penalty imposed  
(Art. 48a) if the offender makes an effort to foil the activities of the 
organisation.
5 The foregoing penalties also apply to any person who commits the 
offence outside Switzerland provided the organisation carries out or 
intends to carry out its criminal activities wholly or partly in Switzer-
land. Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 applies.
Art. 260quater  
Endangering 
public safety 
with weapons
Any person who sells, hires, gifts, hands over or procures firearms, 
weapons prohibited by law, essential components of weapons, weap-
ons accessories, ammunition or components of ammunition, although 
he knows or must assume that the weapons are intended to be used to 
commit a felony or misdemeanour shall be liable, provided his activi-
ties do not constitute a more serious offence, to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty. 
Art. 260quinquies  
Financing 
terrorism
1 Any person who collects or provides funds with a view to financing 
a violent crime that is intended to intimidate the public or to coerce a 
state or international organisation into carrying out or not carrying out 
an act shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or 
to a monetary penalty.
2 If the person merely acknowledges the possibility that the funds may 
be used to finance terrorism, he is not liable to a penalty under this 
Article.
3 The act does not constitute the financing of a terrorist offence if it is 
carried out with a view to establishing or re-establishing a democratic 
regime or a state governed by the rule of law or with a view to exercis-
ing or safeguarding human rights.
4 Paragraph 1 does not apply if the financing is intended to support 
acts that do not violate the rules of international law on the conduct of 
armed conflicts.
Art. 260sexies  
Recruiting, 
training and 
travelling with a 
view to commit-
ting a terrorist 
offence
1 Any person who, with a view to committing a violent felony aimed 
at intimidating the population or coercing a State or an international 
organisation to act or refrain from acting:
a.	recruits another person to commit or participate in such an of-
fence;
b.	accepts training or trains others in the manufacture or use of 
weapons, explosives, radioactive materials, poisonous gases or 
other devices or dangerous substances for the purpose of 
committing or participating in the commission of such an of-
fence; or
c.	travels abroad with the intention of committing, participating 
in or training for such an offence
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2 The same penalty shall apply to any person who collects or provides 
assets with the intention of financing a journey in accordance with 
paragraph 1 letter c, or any person who organises or recruits others to 
make such a journey.
3 Any person who carries out any of the foregoing acts outside Swit-
zerland shall also be liable to prosecution if he or she is in Switzerland 
and is not extradited or if the terrorist offence is to be committed in or 
against Switzerland. Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 apply.
Art. 261
Attack on the 
freedom of faith 
and the freedom 
to worship
Any person who publicly and maliciously insults or mocks the reli-
gious convictions of others, and in particularly their belief in God, or 
maliciously desecrates objects of religious veneration,
any person who maliciously prevents, disrupts or publicly mocks an 
act of worship, the conduct of which is guaranteed by the Constitution, 
or
any person who maliciously desecrates a place or object that is intend-
ed for a religious ceremony or an act of worship the conduct of which 
is guaranteed by the Constitution,
shall be liable to a monetary penalty. 
Art. 261bis  
Discrimination 
and incitement to 
hatred
Any person who publicly incites hatred or discrimination against a 
person or a group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic 
origin, religion or sexual orientation,
any person who publicly disseminates ideologies that have as their 
object the systematic denigration or defamation of that person or 
group of persons,
any person who with the same objective organises, encourages or 
participates in propaganda campaigns,
any person who publicly denigrates or discriminates against another or 
a group of persons on the grounds of their race, ethnic origin, religion 
or sexual orientation in a manner that violates human dignity, whether 
verbally, in writing or pictorially, by using gestures, through acts of 
aggression or by other means, or any person who on any of these 
grounds denies, trivialises or seeks justification for genocide or other 
crimes against humanity,
any person who refuses to provide a service to another on the grounds 
of that person's race, ethnic origin, religion or sexual orientation when 
that service is intended to be provided to the general public,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 262
Disturbing the 
peace of the dead
1.  Any person who desecrates the resting place of a dead person,
any person who maliciously disrupts or desecrates a funeral proces-
sion or funeral ceremony,
any person who desecrates or publicly insults a dead body
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  Any person who removes a dead body or part of a dead body or the 
ashes of a dead person against the will of those entitled thereto shall 
be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 263
Committing an 
offence while in 
a state of 
voluntarily 
induced mental 
incapacity
1 Any person who is incapable of forming criminal intent as a result of 
voluntarily induced intoxication through alcohol or drugs, and while 
in this state commits an act punishable as a felony or misdemeanour 
shall be liable to a monetary penalty. 
2 If the offender has, in this self-induced state, committed an act for 
which the only penalty is a custodial sentence, a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed. 



Title Twelvebis:  
Genocide and Crimes against Humanity
Art. 264
Genocide
The penalty is a custodial sentence of life or a custodial sentence of 
not less than ten years for any person who with the intent to destroy, in 
whole or in part, a group of persons characterised by their nationality, 
race, religion or ethnic, social or political affiliation:
a.	kills members of such a group, or seriously harms them physi-
cally or mentally;
b.	inflicts living conditions on members of such a group that are 
calculated to bring about its total or partial destruction;
c.	orders or takes measures that are directed towards preventing 
births within such a group; or
d.	forcibly transfers children in such a group to another group or 
arranges for such children to be forcibly transferred to another 
group.
Art. 264a
Crimes against 
humanity
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than five years for any 
person who, as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed 
against any civilian population:
a. Intentional 
homicide
a.	intentionally kills another person;
b. Extermination
b.	intentionally kills a number of persons or intentionally inflicts 
conditions of life calculated to bring about the destruction of 
all or part of the population;
c. Enslavement
c.	assumes and exercises a right of ownership over a person, in 
particular in the form of trafficking in persons, sexual exploi-
tation or forced labour;
d. False impris-
onment
d.	severely deprives a person of his or her liberty in violation of 
the fundamental rules of international law;
e. Enforced 
disappearance of 
persons
e.	and with the intention of removing a person from the protec-
tion of the law for a prolonged period of time:
1.	on behalf of or with the acquiescence of a State or politi-
cal organisation, deprives that person of his or her liberty, 
and thereafter refuses to give information on his or her 
fate or whereabouts, or
2.	on behalf of or with the acquiescence of a State or politi-
cal organisation or in violation of a legal duty refuses to 
give information on the fate or whereabouts of the person 
concerned;
f. Torture
f.	inflicts severe pain or suffering or serious injury, whether 
physical or mental, on a person in his or her custody or under 
his or her control;
g. Violation of 
sexual rights
g. 	commits rape in accordance with Article 190 paragraph 2 or 3 
or an indecent assault in accordance with Article 189 para-
graph 2 or 3 of comparable severity on a person, abuses that 
person by committing a sexual act of comparable severity, or 
forces a person into prostitution or to be sterilised or, after she 
has been forcibly made pregnant, confines her unlawfully with 
the intent of affecting the ethnic composition of a population;
h. Deportation or 
forcible transfer
h.	expels or by other coercive acts displaces persons from an area 
in which they are lawfully present;
i. Persecution 
and apartheid
i.	in violation of international law and for political, racist, ethnic, 
religious, social or other reasons, severely denies or deprives a 
group of people of fundamental rights in connection with an 
offence under Title Twelvebis or Title Twelveter or for the pur-
pose of the systematic oppression or domination of an ethnic 
group;
j. Other inhu-
mane acts
j.	commits any other act of a comparable seriousness to the felo-
nies mentioned in this paragraph and thereby causes severe 
pain or suffering or serious injury, whether physical or mental, 
to a person.
2 In especially serious cases, and in particular where the offence 
affects a number of persons or the offender acts in a cruel manner, a 
custodial sentence of life may be imposed.
3 In less serious cases under paragraph 1 letters c-j, a custodial sen-
tence of not less than one year may be imposed.

Title Twelveter:  War Crimes
Art. 264b
1. Scope of 
application
Articles 264d-264j apply in connection with international armed 
conflicts including occupations as well as, unless the nature the of-
fences requires otherwise, in connection with non-international armed 
conflicts.
Art. 264c
2. Serious 
violations of the 
Geneva Conven-
tions
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than five years for any 
person who commits a serious violation of the Geneva Conventions of 
12 August 1949  in connection with an international armed conflict 
by carrying out any of the following acts against persons or property 
protected under the Conventions:
a.	intentional homicide;
b.	hostage taking;
c.	causing severe pain or suffering or serious injury, whether 
physical or mental, in particular by torture, inhuman treatment 
or biological experiments;
d.	extensive destruction and appropriation of property not justi-
fied by military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wan-
tonly;
e.	compelling a person to serve in the forces of a hostile power;
f.	unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement;
g.	denying the right to a fair and regular trial before the imposi-
tion or execution of a severe penalty.
2 Acts in terms of paragraph 1 committed in connection with a non-
international armed conflict are equivalent to serious violations of 
international humanitarian law if they are directed against a person or 
property protected by international humanitarian law.
3 In especially serious cases, and in particular where the offence 
affects a number of persons or the offender acts in a cruel manner, a 
custodial sentence of life may be imposed.
4 In less serious cases under paragraph 1 letters c-g, a custodial sen-
tence of not less than one year may be imposed.
Art. 264d
3. Other war 
crimes
a. Attacks on 
civilians and 
civilian objects
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years for 
any person who in connection with an armed conflict directs an attack:
a.	against the civilian population as such or against individual 
civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;
b.	against personnel, installations, material or vehicles involved 
in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in ac-
cordance with the Charter of the United Nations of 26 June 
1945 , as long as they are entitled to the protection of inter-
national humanitarian law;
c.	against civilian objects, undefended settlements or buildings 
or demilitarised zones that are not military objectives;
d.	against medical units, material or vehicles using a distinctive 
emblem under international humanitarian law or whose pro-
tected character is recognisable even without a distinctive em-
blem, hospitals and places where the sick and wounded are 
collected;
e.	against cultural property or persons entrusted with its protec-
tion or vehicles for its transport, against buildings dedicated to 
religion, education, art, science or charitable purposes, provid-
ed they are protected by international humanitarian law.
2 In especially serious cases of attacks on persons, a custodial sentence 
of life may be imposed.
3 In less serious cases, a custodial sentence of not less than one year 
may be imposed.
Art. 264e
b. Unjustified 
medical treat-
ment, violation 
of sexual rights 
and human 
dignity
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years for 
any person who, in connection with an armed conflict:
a.	causes severe pain or suffering or serious injury or danger, 
whether physical or mental, to a person protected by interna-
tional humanitarian law by subjecting that person to a medical 
procedure that is not justified by the state of his or her health 
and which does comply with generally recognised medical prin-
ciples;
b. 	commits rape in accordance with Article 190 paragraph 2 or 3 
or an indecent assault in accordance with Article 189 para-
graph 2 or 3 of comparable severity on a person protected by 
international humanitarian law, abuses that person by commit-
ting a sexual act of comparable severity, or forces that person 
into prostitution or to be sterilised or, after she has been forci-
bly made pregnant, confines her unlawfully with the intent of 
affecting the ethnic composition of a population;
c.	subjects a person protected by international humanitarian law 
to especially humiliating and degrading treatment.
2 In especially serious cases, and in particular where the offence 
affects a number of persons or the offender acts in a cruel manner, a 
custodial sentence of life may be imposed.
3 In less serious cases, a custodial sentence of not less than one year 
may be imposed.
Art. 264f
c. Recruitment 
and use of child 
soldiers
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years for 
any person who enlists a child under the age of fifteen into armed 
forces or groups or recruiting them for this purpose or using them to 
participate in armed conflicts.
2 In especially serious cases, and in particular where the offence 
affects a number of children or the offender acts in a cruel manner, a 
custodial sentence of life may be imposed 
3 In less serious cases, a custodial sentence of not less than one year 
may be imposed.
Art. 264g
d. Prohibited 
methods of 
warfare
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years for 
any person who, in connection with an armed conflict:
a.	launches an attack although he knows or must assume that 
such an attack will cause loss of life or injury to civilians or 
damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and se-
vere damage to the natural environment which would be clear-
ly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall mili-
tary advantage anticipated;
b.	uses a person protected by international humanitarian law as a 
human shield in order to influence military operations;
c.	as a method of warfare, pillages or otherwise unlawfully ap-
propriates property or destroys or seizes enemy property in a 
way not imperatively demanded by the necessities of war, de-
prives civilians of objects indispensable to their survival or 
impedes relief supplies;
d.	kills or wounds an enemy combatant treacherously or after he 
or she has laid down his or her arms or no longer has a means 
of defence;
e.	mutilates a dead enemy combatant;
f.	as the commander orders that no quarter be given or threatens 
the enemy that no quarter will be given;
g.	makes improper use of a flag of truce, of the flag or of the mil-
itary insignia and uniform of the enemy or of the United Na-
tions, or the distinctive emblems under international humani-
tarian law;
h.	as a member of an occupying power, transfers parts of its own 
civilian population into the territory it is occupying or deports 
all or parts of the population of the occupied territory within or 
outside that territory.
2 In especially serious cases, and in particular where the offence 
affects a number of persons or the offender acts in a cruel manner, a 
custodial sentence of life may be imposed.
3 In less serious cases, a custodial sentence of not less than one year 
may be imposed.
Art. 264h
e. Use of 
prohibited 
weapons
1 The penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than three years for 
any person who, in connection with an armed conflict:
a.	employs poison or poisoned weapons;
b.	employs biological or chemical weapons, including poisonous 
or asphyxiating gases, substances and liquids;
c.	employs bullets which expand or flatten easily or explode in 
the human body;
d.	employs weapons primarily designed to cause injury through 
splinters that cannot be detected by x-ray equipment;
e.	employs laser weapons primarily designed to cause permanent 
blindness.
2 In especially serious cases, a custodial sentence of life may be im-
posed
Art. 264i
4. Violation of a 
ceasefire or 
peace agreement. 
Offences against 
a peace negotia-
tor. Delayed 
repatriation of 
prisoners of war
The penalty is a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a 
monetary penalty for any person who:
a.	continues military operations after receiving official notifica-
tion of an agreement on a ceasefire or a peace agreement, or 
violates the conditions of the ceasefire in some other way;
b.	abuses, insults or without reason obstructs an opposing peace 
negotiator or any of his party;
c.	without justification delays the repatriation of prisoners of war 
after conclusion of military operations.
Art. 264j
5. Other 
violations of 
international 
humanitarian law
The penalty is a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a 
monetary penalty for any person who in connection with an armed 
conflict violates a provision of international humanitarian law other 
than those mentioned in Articles 264c-264i, where such a violation is 
declared to be an offence under customary international law or an 
international treaty recognised as binding by Switzerland.

Title Twelvequater:   
Common Provisions for Title Twelvebis and Title Twelveter
Art. 264k
Criminal liability 
of superiors
1 A superior who is aware that a subordinate is carrying out or will 
carry out an act under the Title Twelvebis or Title Twelveter and who 
fails to take appropriate measures to prevent the act shall be liable to 
the same penalty as the perpetrator of the act. If the superior fails to 
prevent the act through negligence, a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or a monetary penalty shall be imposed.
2 A superior who is aware that a subordinate has carried out an act 
under Title Twelvebis or Title Twelveter and who fails to take appro-
priate measures to ensure the prosecution of the perpetrator of the act 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 264l
Acting on orders
A subordinate who, on orders from a superior or on orders of equiva-
lent binding effect, carries out an act under Title Twelvebis or Title 
Twelveter is guilty of an offence if he was aware at the time that the 
act is an offence.
Art. 264m
Acts carried out 
abroad
1 A person who carries out an act under Title Twelvebis, Title Twelvet-
er or Article 264k while abroad is guilty of an offence if he is in Swit-
zerland and is not extradited to another State or delivered to an inter-
national criminal court whose jurisdiction is recognised by Switzer-
land.
2 Where the victim of the act carried out abroad is not Swiss and the 
perpetrator is not Swiss, the prosecution, with the exception of 
measures to secure evidence, may be abandoned or may be dispensed 
with provided:
a.	a foreign authority or an international criminal court whose 
jurisdiction is recognised by Switzerland is prosecuting the of-
fence and the suspected perpetrator is extradited or delivered 
to the court; or
b.	the suspected perpetrator is no longer in Switzerland and is not 
expected to return there.
3 Article 7 paragraphs 4 and 5 applies unless the acquittal, or the 
remission or application of time limits for the execution of the sen-
tence abroad has the aim of protecting the offender from punishment 
without justification.
Art. 264n
Exclusion of 
relative immuni-
ty
The prosecution offences under Title Twelvebis, Title Twelveter and 
under Article 264k does not require authorisation in accordance with 
any of the following provisions:
a.	Article 7 paragraph 2 letter b of the Criminal Procedure 
Code ;
b.	Article 14 and 15 of the Government Liability Act of 
14 March 1958 ;
c.	Article 17 of the Parliament Act of 13 December 2002 ;
d.	Article 61a of the Government and Administration Organisa-
tion Act of 21 March 1997 ;
e.	Article 11 of the Federal Supreme Court Act of 17 June 
2005 ;
f.	Article 12 of the Federal Administrative Court Act of 17 June 
2005 ;
g.	Article 16 of the Patent Court Act of 20. March 2009 ;
h.	Article 50 of the Criminal Justice Authorities Act of 19 March 
2010 .

Title Thirteen: 
Felonies and Misdemeanours against the State 
and National Security
Art. 265
1. Felonies and 
misdemeanours 
against the state
High treason
Any person who carries out an act with the aim, through the use of 
violence, 
of changing the constitution of the Confederation  or of a canton ,
of deposing the constitutionally appointed state authorities or render-
ing them unable to exercise their powers, or
of severing an area of Swiss territory from the Confederation or a part 
of cantonal territory from a canton,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one year .
Art. 266
Attacks on the 
independence of 
the Confedera-
tion
1.  Any person who a carries out an act with the aim of
violating or endangering the independence of the Confederation or
endangering the independence of the Confederation by bringing about 
the interference of a foreign power in federal affairs,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one year.
2.  Any person who enters into a relationship with the government of a 
foreign state or its agents with the aim of bringing about a war against 
the Confederation shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less 
than three years.
In serious cases a life sentence may be imposed. 
Art. 266bis  
Foreign opera-
tions and 
activities 
directed against 
the security of 
Switzerland
1 Any person who with a view to bringing about or supporting foreign 
operations or activities directed against the security of Switzerland, 
contacts a foreign state, foreign parties, or other foreign organisations 
or their agents, or issues or disseminates false or distorted information 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2 In serious cases, a custodial sentence of not less than one year shall 
be imposed.  
Art. 267
Diplomatic 
treason
1.  Any person who wilfully makes known or makes accessible to a 
foreign state or its agents or to the general public a secret, the preser-
vation of which is necessary in the interests of the Confederation, 
any person who falsifies, destroys, disposes of or steals documents or 
evidence relating to legal relations between the Confederation or a 
canton and a foreign state and thus endangers the interests of the 
Confederation or the canton, or
any person who, as the authorised representative of the Confederation, 
conducts negotiations with a foreign government which are intended 
to be detrimental to the Confederation,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one year.
2.  Any person who wilfully makes known or makes accessible to the 
general public a secret, the preservation of which is necessary in the 
interests of the Confederation shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.  
3.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding three years or a monetary penalty shall be im-
posed. 
Art. 268
Moving of 
national 
boundary 
markers
Any person who removes, moves, renders unrecognisable, falsely 
positions or falsifies a boundary stone or other boundary marker 
which serves to indicate a national, cantonal or communal boundary 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 269
Violation of 
Swiss territorial 
sovereignty
Any person forcibly enters Swiss territory in violation of international 
law shall be liable to a custodial sentence or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 270
Attacks on Swiss 
national 
emblems
Any person who maliciously removes, damages or acts in an insulting 
manner towards a Swiss national emblem which is displayed by a 
public authority, and in particular the coat of arms or the flag of the 
Confederation or a canton shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 271 
Unlawful 
activities on 
behalf of a 
foreign state
1.  Any person who carries out activities on behalf of a foreign state 
on Swiss territory without lawful authority, where such activities are 
the responsibility of a public authority or public official,
any person who carries out such activities for a foreign party or organ-
isation,
any person who facilitates such activities,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty, or in serious cases to a custodial sentence of not 
less than one year. 
2.  Any person who abducts another by using violence, false pretences 
or threats and takes him abroad in order to hand him over to a foreign 
authority, party or other organisation or to expose him to a danger to 
life or limb shall be liable to a custodial sentence of not less than one 
year.
3.  Any person who makes preparations for such an abduction shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 272 
2. Espionage
Political 
espionage
1.  Any person who provides political intelligence-gathering services 
or organises such services in the interest of a foreign state, a foreign 
party or any other foreign organisation, to the detriment of Switzer-
land or its citizens, inhabitants or organisations,
any person who recruits others for or facilitates such services,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  In serious cases, the penalty is a custodial sentence of not less than 
one year. A serious case is constituted, in particular, where the offend-
er incites activities or makes false reports such that the internal or 
external security of the Confederation is threatened.
Art. 273
Industrial 
espionage
Any person who seeks to obtain a manufacturing or trade secret in 
order to make it available to an external official agency, a foreign 
organisation, a private enterprise, or the agents of any of these, or,
any person who makes a manufacturing or trade secret available to an 
foreign official agency, a foreign organisation, a private enterprise, or 
the agents of any of these,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty, or in serious cases to a custodial sentence of not 
less than one year. 
Art. 274 
Military 
espionage
1. Any person who conducts or organises military intelligence-
gathering services on behalf of a foreign state and to the detriment of 
Switzerland, 
any person who recruits others to conduct or facilitates such services,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
In serious cases, a custodial sentence of not less than one year shall be 
imposed. 
2.  Any correspondence and materials shall be confiscated.
Art. 275 
3. Endangering 
the constitutional 
order
Attacks on the 
constitutional 
order
Any person who carries out an act which is intended to disrupt or alter 
the constitutional order of the Confederation  or the cantons  in an 
unlawful manner shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
five years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 275bis and 275ter  
Art. 276
4. Disruption of 
military security
Incitement and 
inducement to 
violate military 
duties
1.  Any person who publicly incites others to disobey military orders, 
to violate military duties, to refuse to perform military service or to 
desert, and
any person who induces a person obliged to perform military service 
to carry out such an act,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  Where the incitement or inducement relates to mutiny or the prepa-
ration for mutiny, a custodial sentence or a monetary penalty shall be 
imposed.
Art. 277 
Forgery of 
military orders 
or instructions
1.  Any person who wilfully forges, falsifies, suppresses or removes a 
call-up order, mobilisation order or marching order, or instructions 
intended for those obliged to perform military service, and
any person who makes use of such a forged or falsified order or in-
struction,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed.
Art. 278
Disruption of 
military service
Any person who prevents a member of the armed forces from carrying 
out his military service or obstructs him in the course of his service 
shall be liable to a monetary penalty. 

Title Fourteen:  
Misdemeanours against the Will of the People
Art. 279
Disruption and 
obstruction of 
elections and 
votes
Any person who by the use of violence or the threat of seriously 
detrimental consequences obstructs or disrupts a meeting, election or 
vote organised under the terms of the constitution or the law, and any 
person who by the use of violence or the threat of seriously detri-
mental consequences obstructs or disrupts the collection of signatures 
for or the handing-over of a petition requesting a referendum or initia-
tive,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 280
Attacks on the 
right to vote
Any person who by the use of violence or the threat of seriously 
detrimental consequences prevents a voter from exercising his right to 
vote or to sign a petition requesting a referendum or initiative, and
any person who by the use of violence or the threat of seriously detri-
mental consequences coerces a voter into exercising his voting rights 
or into voting in a particular way,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 281
Corrupt electoral 
practices
Any person who offers, promises, or gives a voter or arranges for a 
voter to be given a gift or other advantage in return for voting in a 
particular way, or in return for signing or refusing to sign a request for 
a referendum or an initiative, 
any person who offers, promises, or gives a voter or arranges for a 
voter to be given a gift or other advantage in return for not participat-
ing in an election or vote, and
any person who as a voter secures the promise of or arranges for 
himself to be given such an advantage,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 282
Electoral fraud
1.  Any person who forges, falsifies, removes or destroys an electoral 
register,
any person who participates in an election or a vote, or signs a request 
for a referendum or an initiative without authority, and
any person who falsifies the results of an election or vote or a petition 
requesting a referendum or initiative, in particular by adding, altering, 
omitting, deleting ballot papers or signatures, counting them incorrect-
ly or incorrectly certifying the result,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the offender acts in official capacity, a custodial sentence of from 
one month to three years or a monetary penalty of not less than 30 
daily penalty units shall be imposed. 
Art. 282bis  
Vote catching
Any person who systematically collects, completes or alters ballot 
papers, or distributes ballot papers which have been completed or 
altered in this way shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 283
Breach of voting 
secrecy
Any person who obtains knowledge by unlawful means of how indi-
viduals have voted shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceed-
ing three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 284 

Title Fifteen: Offences against Official Powers
Art. 285
Violence and 
threats against 
public authorities 
and public 
officials
1. Any person who by the use of violence or threats prevents an au-
thority, one of its members or a public official from carrying out an 
official act, or coerces them to carry out such an act, or attacks them 
while they are carrying out such an act shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years. In minor cases, a monetary penal-
ty may be imposed. 
Public officials also include employees of undertakings in terms of the 
Railways Act of 20 December 1957 , the Passenger Transport Act of 
20 March 2009  and the Goods Transport Act of 19 December 
2008 , as well as employees of organisations operating with a li-
cence from the Federal Office of Transport under the Federal Act of 
18 June 2010  on the Security Units of Public Transport Compa-
nies.  
2. If the offence is committed by a mob, any person who participates 
in the mob shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years. In minor cases, a monetary penalty may be imposed.
Any participant who uses violence against persons or property shall be 
liable to custodial sentence of from one month to three years 
Any participant who uses violence against property shall be liable to 
custodial sentence of from one month to three years or to a monetary 
penalty of not less than 90 daily penalty units. 
Art. 286 
Prevention of an 
official act
Any person who prevents a public authority, one of its members or a 
public official from carrying out an act which is one of their official 
duties shall be liable to a monetary penalty not exceeding 30 daily 
penalty units.
Public officials also include employees of undertakings in terms of the 
Railways Act of 20 December 1957 , the Passenger Transport Act of 
20 March 2009  and the Goods Transport Act of 19 December 
2008 , as well as employees of organisations operating with a li-
cence from the Federal Office of Transport under the Federal Act of 
18 June 2010  on the Security Units of Public Transport Compa-
nies. 
Art. 287
Usurpation 
office
Any person who with unlawful intention usurps the exercise of an 
official function or military command shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 288 
Art. 289
Removal of 
seized property
Any person who removes from official control an item of property 
which has been officially seized shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 290
Breaking the 
seals
Any person who breaks open, removes or renders ineffective an offi-
cial mark and in particular an official seal which is used to close or 
identify an object shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 291
Breach of an 
expulsion order 
order or a 
contact prohibi-
tion and 
exclusion order
1 Any person who breaches an order issued by a competent authority 
to expel him from the territory of the Swiss Confederation or a canton 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2 The duration the sentence is not taken into account in determining 
the length of the period of expulsion.
Art. 292
Contempt 
official orders
Any person who fails to comply with an official order that has been 
issued to him by a competent authority or public official under the 
threat of the criminal penalty for non-compliance in terms of this 
Article shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 293
Publication of 
secret official 
proceedings
1 Any person who publishes information from the files, proceedings or 
official investigations of a public authority which have been declared 
secret by that authority by law or by a lawful order issued by the 
authority shall be liable to a fine. 
2 Complicity is also a criminal offence.
3 The act does not carry a penalty unless publication is contrary to an 
overriding public or private interest. 
Art. 294 
Breach of an 
activity 
prohibition order 
or a contact 
prohibition and 
exclusion order
1 Any person who carries on an activity that he is prohibited from 
carrying on by a prohibition order under Article 67 hereof, Article 50 
of the Military Criminal Code of 13 June 1927  (MCC) or Article 
16a JCLA  shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding one 
year or monetary penalty.
2 Any person who contacts or approaches one or more specific persons 
or persons in a specific group or is present in a specific location when 
he is prohibited from doing so by a contact prohibition and exclusion 
order under Article 67b hereof, Article 50b MCC or Article 16a JCLA 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding one year or mone-
tary penalty.
Art. 295 
Failure to 
comply with 
probation 
assistance or 
instructions
Any person who fails to comply with probation assistance ordered by 
the court or the executive authority or with instructions issued by the 
court or the executive authority shall be liable to a fine.

Title Sixteen: Offences detrimental to Foreign Relations
Art. 296 
Insulting a 
foreign state
Any person who publicly insults a foreign state in the person of its 
head of state, the members of its government, its diplomatic represent-
atives, its official delegates to a diplomatic conference taking place in 
Switzerland, or one of its official representatives to an international 
organisation or department thereof based or sitting in Switzerland 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 297 
Insulting an 
international 
organisation
Any person who publicly insults an international organisation or 
department thereof based or sitting in Switzerland in the person of one 
of its official representatives shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 298
Attacks on the 
national 
emblems of a 
foreign state
Any person who wilfully removes, damages or conducts himself in an 
insulting manner towards a national emblem of a foreign state, and in 
particular its coat of arms or flag which is publicly displayed by one of 
its official representatives shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 299
Violation of 
foreign territorial 
sovereignty
1.  Any person who violates the territorial sovereignty of a foreign 
state, in particular by conducting official activities without authorisa-
tion on foreign territory,
any person who enters foreign territory in breach of international law,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  Any person who attempts from within Swiss territory to disrupt the 
political order of a foreign state through the use of force shall be liable 
to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary 
penalty.
Art. 300
Hostility towards 
a country at war 
or foreign troops
Any person who from neutral Swiss territory acts in a hostile manner 
towards or supports hostile acts against a country at war,
any person who acts in a hostile manner towards foreign troops who 
have been admitted to Switzerland,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 301
Military 
espionage 
against a foreign 
state
1.  Any person who conducts or organises the conduct of military 
intelligence gathering services on Swiss territory for a foreign state 
against another foreign state, and
any person who recruits persons for or facilitates such services,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  Any correspondence and other materials shall be forfeited.
Art. 302 
Prosecution
1 Felonies and misdemeanours under this Title are only prosecuted on 
the authority of the Federal Council.
2 The Federal Council shall order a prosecution only if a request to do 
so is received from the government of the foreign state in the case of 
Article 296 or from a governing officer of the international organisa-
tion in the case of Article 297. In times of active service, the Federal 
Council may also order a prosecution in the absence of a request.
3 In the case of Articles 296 and 297, the right to prosecute is subject 
to a limitation period of two years. 

Title Seventeen: 
Felonies and Misdemeanours against the Administration 
of Justice
Art. 303 
False accusation
1.  Any person who makes an accusation to the authorities that a 
person whom he knows to be innocent has committed a felony or a 
misdemeanour, with the intention of causing a criminal prosecution to 
be brought against that person,
any person who otherwise carries out malicious acts with the intention 
of causing a criminal prosecution to be brought against a person whom 
he knows to be innocent,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the false accusation relates to a contravention, a custodial sen-
tence not exceeding one year or a monetary penalty shall be imposed. 
Art. 304
Misleading the 
judicial authori-
ties
1.  Any person who reports the commission of a criminal offence to 
the judicial authorities which he knows has not been committed,
any person who falsely reports to the judicial authorities that he has 
himself committed an offence,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  ...  
Art. 305
Assisting 
offenders
1 Any person who assists another to evade prosecution, the execution 
of a sentence, or the execution of any of the measures provided for in 
Articles 59-61, 63 and 64  shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
1bis Any person who assists a person who is being prosecuted or has 
been convicted outside Switzerland in respect of a felony in accord-
ance with Article 101 to evade prosecution or the execution of a 
custodial sentence or a measure within the meaning of Articles 59-61, 
63 or 64 in that place shall be liable to the same penalties as in para-
graph 1.  
2 If the person assists a relative or another person to whom he is so 
closely related that his conduct is excusable, he shall not be liable to 
any penalty. 
Art. 305bis  
Money launder-
ing
1.  Any person who carries out an act that is aimed at frustrating the 
identification of the origin, the tracing or the forfeiture of assets which 
he knows or must assume originate from a felony or aggravated tax 
misdemeanour shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty. 
1bis. An aggravated tax misdemeanour is any of the offences set out in 
Article 186 of the Federal Act of 14 December 1990  on Direct 
Federal Taxation and Article 59 paragraph 1 clause one of the Federal 
Act of 14 December 1990  on the Harmonisation of Direct Federal 
Taxation at Cantonal and Communal Levels, if the tax evaded in any 
tax period exceeds 300 000 francs. 
2.  In serious cases, the penalty is a custodial sentence not exceeding 
five years or a monetary penalty. 
A serious case is constituted, in particular, where the offender:
a. 	acts as a member of a criminal or terrorist organisation;
b.	acts as a member of a group that has been formed for the pur-
pose of the continued conduct of money laundering activities; 
or
c.	achieves a large turnover or substantial profit through com-
mercial money laundering.
3.  The offender is also liable to the foregoing penalties where the 
main offence was committed abroad, provided such an offence is also 
liable to prosecution at the place of commission. 
Art. 305ter  
Insufficient 
diligence in 
financial 
transactions and 
right to report  
1 Any person who as part of his profession accepts, holds on deposit, 
or assists in investing or transferring outside assets and fails to ascer-
tain the identity of the beneficial owner of the assets with the care that 
is required in the circumstances shall be liable to a custodial sentence 
not exceeding one year or to a monetary penalty. 
2 The persons included in paragraph 1 above are entitled to report to 
the Money Laundering Reporting Office in the Federal Office of 
Police any observations that indicate that assets originate from a 
felony or an aggravated tax misdemeanour in terms of Article 305bis 
number 1bis. 
Art. 306
Perjury by a 
party to civil 
proceedings
1 Any person who is a party to civil proceedings and, following an 
express caution by the judge that he must tell the truth and notification 
of the penalties for failure to do so, gives false evidence in relation to 
the case shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty.
2 ... 
3 If the false statement relates to matters that are irrelevant to the 
judicial decision, the penalty is a monetary penalty. 
Art. 307
Perjury. 
Perjury by an 
expert witness. 
False translation
1 Any person who appears in judicial proceedings as a witness, expert 
witness, translator or interpreter and gives false evidence or provides a 
false report, a false expert opinion or a false translation in relation to 
the case shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years 
or to a monetary penalty.
2 ... 
3 If the false statement relates to matters that are irrelevant to the 
court's decision, a monetary penalty shall be imposed. 
Art. 308 
Mitigation of the 
sentence and 
exempted acts
1 If the offender makes his false accusation (Art. 303), false report of 
an offence (Art. 304) or a false statement (Art. 306 and 307) of his 
own accord and before it has caused any legal detriment to others, the 
court may reduce the sentence (Art. 48a) or waive a penalty.
2 The offender shall not be liable to a penalty if he has made a false 
statement (Art. 306 and 307) because: 
a.	by testifying truthfully, he would risk prosecution; or
b.	by testifying truthfully, a relative or another person to whom 
he is so closely related that his conduct is excusable would 
risk prosecution.
Art. 309 
Administrative 
cases and 
proceedings 
before interna-
tional courts
Articles 306-308 also apply to:
a.	the administrative court proceedings, arbitration proceedings 
and proceedings before public authorities and public officials 
who are entitled to examine witnesses;
b.	proceedings before international courts where Switzerland 
recognises their mandatory jurisdiction.
Art. 310
Assisting 
prisoners to 
escape
1.  Any person who by using force, threats or false pretences, frees or 
assists in the escape of a person under arrest, a convicted prisoner or a 
person committed to an institution by official order shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty. 
2.  If the act is committed by a mob, any person who participates in 
the mob shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty. 
Any participants who commit acts of violence against persons or 
property shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from three months to 
three years or to a monetary penalty of not less than 90 daily penalty 
units. 
Art. 311
Prison mutiny
1.  Convicted prisoners or other persons who have been committed to 
an institution by official order who form a riotous assembly with the 
common intent
to attack the officers of the institution or other persons entrusted with 
their supervision,
to coerce these persons by force or the threat of force to carry out acts 
or abstain from carrying out acts, or
to break out of the institution by using force,
are liable to a custodial sentence of from one month to three years or 
to a monetary penalty of not less than 30 daily penalty units. 
2.  Any participant who commits acts of violence against persons or 
property shall be liable to a custodial sentence of from three months to 
five years or to a monetary penalty of not less than 90 daily penalty 
units.  

Title Eighteen:  
Offences against Official or Professional Duty
Art. 312
Abuse of public 
office
Any member of an authority or a public official who abuses his offi-
cial powers in order to secure an unlawful advantage for himself or 
another or to cause prejudice to another shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding five years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 313  
Overcharging of 
taxes
Any public official who with a view to his own or another's gain 
levies taxes, fees or other charges which are not due or which exceed 
the statutory rates shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 314  
Misconduct in 
public office
Any member of an authority or public official who, in the course of a 
legal transaction and with a view to obtaining an unlawful advantage 
for himself or another, damages the public interests that he has a duty 
to safeguard shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five 
years or to a monetary penalty. 
Art. 315-316 
Art. 317 
Forgery of a 
document by a 
public official
1.  Any public official or person acting in an official capacity who 
wilfully forges or falsifies a document or uses the genuine signature or 
handwriting of another to produce a false document,
any public official or person acting in an official capacity who wilfully 
falsely certifies a fact of legal significance, and in particular falsely 
certifies the authenticity of a signature or handwriting or the accuracy 
of a copy,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
2.  If the offence is committed through negligence, a monetary penalty 
shall be imposed. 
Art. 317bis  
Exempted acts
1 Any person who, as part of a covert investigation, produces, amends 
or uses documents with the approval of a court in order to construct or 
maintain his cover story or produces, amends or uses documents with 
the authorisation of the Federal Intelligence Service (FIS) under 
Article 17 IntelSA  or the authorisation of the Head of the Federal 
Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport (DDPS) in accord-
ance with Article 18 IntelSA in order to create or maintain his cover 
story or assumed identity does not commit an offence under Articles 
251, 252, 255 and 317. 
2 Any person who, with authorisation for a covert investigation or as 
instructed by the competent authority under Article 17 or 18 IntelSA, 
produces or amends official documents for the purposes of cover 
stories or assumed identities does not commit an offence under Arti-
cles 251, 252, 255 and 317. 
3 Any person who produces, amends or uses official documents under 
the Federal Act of 23 December 2011  on Extra-Procedural Witness 
Protection does not commit an offence under Articles 251, 252, 255 
and 317. 
Art. 318
Issuing a false 
medical certifi-
cate
1.  Any doctor, dentist, veterinary surgeon or midwife who wilfully 
issues a certificate, the content of which is untrue, for the purpose of 
being produced to the authorities or to obtain an unlawful advantage, 
or which may prejudice the substantial and lawful interests of third 
parties shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years 
or to a monetary penalty.
If the offender has requested, accepted or secured the promise of 
recompense, a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to mone-
tary penalty shall be imposed. 
2.  ...  
Art. 319
Assistance by a 
public official in 
the escape of 
prisoners
Any public official who assists or allows a person under arrest, a 
convicted prisoner or a person committed to an institution by official 
order to escape shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 320 
Breach of 
official secrecy
1.  Any person who discloses secret information that has been confid-
ed to him in his capacity as a member of an authority or as a public 
official or which has come to his knowledge in the execution of his 
official duties or as an auxiliary to a public official or an authority 
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a 
monetary penalty.
A breach of official secrecy remains an offence following termination 
of employment as a member of an authority or as a public official or 
of the auxiliary activity.
2.  The offender is not liable to any penalty if he has disclosed the 
secret information with the written consent of his superior authority.
Art. 321
Breach of 
professional 
confidentiality
1.  Any person who in his capacity as a member of the clergy, lawyer, 
defence lawyer, notary, patent attorney, auditor subject to a duty of 
confidentiality under the Code of Obligations (CO) , doctor, dentist, 
chiropractor, pharmacist, midwife, psychologist, nurse, physiothera-
pist, occupational therapist, dietician, optometrist, osteopath or as an 
assistant to any of the foregoing persons discloses confidential infor-
mation that has been confided to him in his professional capacity or 
which has come to his knowledge in the practice of his profession 
shall be liable on complaint to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty. 
A student who discloses confidential information that has come to his 
knowledge in the course of his studies is also liable to the foregoing 
penalties.
A breach of professional confidentiality remains an offence following 
the termination of professional employment or of the studies.
2.  The person disclosing the information is not liable to any penalty if 
he does so with the consent of the person to whom the information 
pertains or on the basis of written authorisation issued in response to 
his application by a superior authority or supervisory authority.
3.  The federal and cantonal provisions on the duties to report and 
cooperate, the duty to testify and on the obligation to provide infor-
mation to an authority are reserved.  
Art. 321bis  
Breach of 
professional 
confidentiality in 
research 
involving human 
beings
1 Any person who discloses without authorisation a professional secret 
that has come to his knowledge in the course of his research activities 
involving human beings in accordance with the Human Research Act 
of 30 September 2011  shall be liable to a penalty in accordance 
with Article 321.
2 Professional secrets may be disclosed for the purpose of research 
into human diseases and concerning the structure and function of the 
human body if the requirements of Article 34 of the Human Research 
Act of 30 September 2011 are met and authorisation for disclosure has 
been obtained from the responsible ethics committee.
Art. 321ter  
Breach of postal 
or telecommuni-
cations secrecy
1 Any person who in his capacity as a public official, employee or 
auxiliary of an organisation providing postal or telecommunications 
services reveals to a third party details of customers' post, payments or 
telecommunications, opens sealed mail or tries to find out its content, 
or allows a third party the opportunity to carry out such an act shall be 
liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a mone-
tary penalty.
2 The foregoing penalties also apply to any person who by deception 
causes a person bound by a duty of confidentiality in terms of para-
graph 1 to breach his obligation of secrecy.
3 A breach of postal or telecommunications secrecy remains an of-
fence even after termination of employment as a public official, em-
ployee or auxiliary of an organisation providing postal or telecommu-
nication services.
4 A breach of postal or telecommunications secrecy does not carry a 
penalty if it is carried out in order to determine the identity of the 
entitled person. 
5 Article 179octies is reserved, together with the federal and cantonal 
provisions on the obligations to give evidence or provide information 
to a public authority.
Art. 322 
Breach of the 
media duty to 
provide infor-
mation
1 Media organisations are obliged, at the request of any person, to 
reveal immediately and in writing their place of business and the 
identity of those responsible for their publications (Art. 28 para. 2 and 
3). 
2 Newspapers, magazines or periodicals must indicate in an imprint 
the place of business of their media organisation, significant holdings 
in other organisations and the editor responsible. If the editor is re-
sponsible only for part of the newspaper, magazine or periodical, it 
must be indicated that he is the editor responsible for that part. Details 
of the editors responsible must be given for each part of the newspa-
per, magazine or periodical.
3 In the event of any violation of the provisions of this Article, the 
manager of the media organisation shall be liable to a fine. If the 
person indicated as editor (Art. 28 para. 2 and 3) does not in fact hold 
such a position, this also constitutes an offence. 
Art. 322bis  
Failure to 
prevent an illegal 
publication 
1 Any person who, as the person responsible in terms of Article 28 
paragraphs 2 and 3, wilfully fails to prevent the publication of materi-
al, the publication of which constitutes an offence shall be liable to a 
custodial sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty. 
If the offence is committed through negligence, the penalty is a fine.
2 If the penalty for the offence that applies to the author in accordance 
with Article 28 paragraph 1 is less severe, that penalty shall be im-
posed.
3 If the offence committed by the author is only prosecuted on com-
plaint, the offence under paragraph 1 shall only be prosecuted if a 
complaint has been made against the author.

Title Nineteen:  Bribery
Art. 322ter
1. Bribery of 
Swiss public 
officials
Bribery
Any person who offers, promises or gives a member of a judicial or 
other authority, a public official, an officially-appointed expert, trans-
lator or interpreter, an arbitrator, or a member of the armed forces an 
undue advantage, or offers, promises or gives such an advantage to a 
third party in order to cause the public official to carry out or to fail to 
carry out an act in connection with his official activity which is con-
trary to his duty or dependent on his discretion,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 322quater
Acceptance of 
bribes
Any person who as a member of a judicial or other authority, as a 
public official, officially-appointed expert, translator or interpreter, or 
as an arbitrator demands, secures the promise of or accepts an undue 
advantage for that person or for a third party in order that he carries 
out or fails to carry out an act in connection with his official activity 
which is contrary to his duty or dependent on his discretion,
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 322quinquies 
Granting an 
advantage
Any person who offers, promises or gives a member of a judicial or 
other authority, a public official, an officially-appointed expert, trans-
lator or interpreter, an arbitrator or a member of the armed forces an 
undue advantage for that person or for a third party in order that the 
person carries out his official duties shall be liable to a custodial 
sentence not exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 322sexies 
Acceptance of an 
advantage
Any person who as a member of a judicial or other authority, as a 
public official, officially-appointed expert, translator or interpreter, or 
as an arbitrator, demands, secures the promise of, or accepts an undue 
advantage for himself or for a third party in order that he carries out 
his official duties shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding 
three years or to a monetary penalty.
Art. 322septies
2. Bribery of 
foreign public 
officials
Any person who offers, promises or gives a member of a judicial or 
other authority, a public official, an officially-appointed expert, trans-
lator or interpreter, an arbitrator, or a member of the armed forces who 
is acting for a foreign state or international organisation an undue 
advantage, or gives such an advantage to a third party, in order that the 
person carries out or fails to carry out an act in connection with his 
official activities which is contrary to his duties or dependent on his 
discretion,
any person who as a member of a judicial or other authority, a public 
official, an officially-appointed expert, translator or interpreter, an 
arbitrator, or a member of the armed forces of a foreign state or of an 
international organisation demands, secures the promise of, or accepts 
an undue advantage for himself or for a third party in order that he 
carries out or fails to carry out an act in connection with his official 
activity which is contrary to his duty or dependent on his discretion  
shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding five years or to a 
monetary penalty.
Art. 322octies 
3. Bribery of 
private individu-
als
Bribery
1.  Any person who offers, promises or gives an employee, partner, 
agent or any other auxiliary of a third party in the private sector an 
undue advantage for that person or a third party in order that the 
person carries out or fails to carry out an act in connection with his 
official activities which is contrary to his duties or dependent on his 
discretion shall be liable to a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or to a monetary penalty.
2 In minor cases, the offence is only prosecuted on complaint.
Art. 322novies  
Accepting bribes
1 Any person who as an employee, partner, agent or any other auxilia-
ry of a third party in the private sector demands, secures the promise 
of, or accepts an undue advantage for himself or for a third party in 
order that the person carries out or fails to carry out an act in connec-
tion with his official activities which is contrary to his duties or de-
pendent on his discretion shall be liable to a custodial sentence not 
exceeding three years or to a monetary penalty.
2 In minor cases, the offence is only prosecuted on complaint.
Art. 322decies  
4. General 
provisions
1 The following are not undue advantages:
a.	advantages permitted under public employment law or con-
tractually approved by a third party;
b.	negligible advantages that are common social practice.
2 Private individuals who fulfil official duties are subject to the same 
provisions as public officials.

Title Twenty:  Contraventions of Federal Law
Art. 323 
Failure of a 
debtor to comply 
with the 
regulations 
governing Debt 
Enforcement and 
Bankruptcy 
proceedings
The following persons are liable to a fine:
1.  a debtor who is not present or has not appointed a representative to 
be present at the seizure of or the recording of an inventory of his 
assets of which he has been given lawful notice (Art. 91 para. 1 no 1, 
163 para. 2 and 341 para. 1 DEBA ); 
2.  a debtor who fails to disclose his assets including those not in his 
possession, or his claims and rights against third parties to the extent 
required to obtain satisfaction by seizure or to implement an attach-
ment (Art. 91 para. 1 para. 2 and 275 DEBA);
3.  a debtor who fails to fully disclose his assets including those not in 
his possession, or his claims and rights against third parties on the 
recording of an inventory of assets (Art. 163 para. 2, 341 para. 1 
DEBA); 
4.  a debtor who fails to disclose or make available all his assets to the 
Bankruptcy Office (Art. 222 para. 1 DEBA);
5.  a debtor who does not make himself available to the bankruptcy 
administrator during the bankruptcy proceedings unless he has special 
permission to be excused this duty (Art. 229 para. 1 DEBA).
Art. 324 
Failure of third 
parties to comply 
with the 
regulations 
governing debt 
collection, 
bankruptcy and 
composition 
proceedings
The following persons are liable to a fine:
1.  any adult person who shared a household with a debtor who is 
deceased or has absconded and who fails to disclose full details of that 
debtor's assets and to make themselves available to the Bankruptcy 
Office (Art. 222 para. 2 DEBA );
2.  any debtor of a bankrupt who fails to report to the Bankruptcy 
Office within the time limit (Art. 232 para. 2 para. 3 DEBA);
3.  any person who possesses items belonging to a debtor as a pledge 
or for any other reason and fails to deliver such items to the Bankrupt-
cy Office within the time limit (Art. 232 para. 2 para. 4 DEBA);
4.  any person who possesses items belonging to a debtor as a pledgee 
and fails to deliver such items to the liquidators after expiry of the 
time limit for realisation (Art. 324 para. 2 DEBA);
5.  any third party who fails to comply with his duty to provide infor-
mation and to deliver assets in accordance with Articles 57a paragraph 
1, 91 paragraph 4, 163 paragraph 2, 222 paragraph 4 and 341 para-
graph 1 of the DEBA. 
Art. 325
Failure to 
comply with 
accounting 
regulations
Any person who wilfully or through negligence fails to comply with 
the statutory duty to keep proper accounts or to preserve accounts, 
business correspondence and business telegrams,
any person who wilfully or through negligence fails to comply with 
the statutory duty to preserve accounts, business correspondence and 
business telegrams,
shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 325bis  
Infringement of 
the regulations 
on reporting 
payments to state 
bodies
A person shall be liable to a fine if he or she wilfully commits any of 
the following acts:
a.	provides false information in the report on payments made to 
state bodies in accordance with Article 964d CO  or wholly 
or partly fails to make the required report;
b.	fails to comply with the obligation to keep and retain reports 
on payments to state bodies in accordance with Article 964h 
CO.
Art. 325ter  
Infringement of 
other reporting 
obligations
1 A person shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 100 000 francs if he 
or she wilfully commits any of the following acts: 
a.	provides false information in the reports in accordance with 
Articles 964a, 964b and 964l CO  or fails to make the re-
quired reports; 
b.	fails to comply with the statutory obligation to retain and doc-
ument the reports in accordance with Articles 964c and 964l 
CO.
2 A person who acts through negligence shall be liable to a fine not 
exceeding 50 000 francs.
Art. 325quater  
Failure to 
comply with the 
regulations 
governing the 
protection of 
tenants of 
domestic and 
commercial 
properties
Any person who prevents or attempts to prevent a tenant by the threat 
of detrimental consequences, and in particular the termination of the 
lease, from contesting the level of rent or other claims of the landlord,
any person who serves notice of termination on the tenant because the 
tenant asserts or wishes to assert his rights under the CO , or
any person who unlawfully demands or attempts to demand payment 
of rent or other claims after the failure of an attempt to reach agree-
ment thereon or following a court judgment thereon,
shall be liable on complaint by the tenant to a fine.
Art. 326 
Application to 
legal entities, 
trading compa-
nies and sole 
proprietor-
ships 
1. ...




Art. 326bis  
2. In cases 
falling under 
Article 
325quater 
1 Where the acts constituting offences under Article 325quater are 
committed while attending to the affairs of a legal entity, general or 
limited partnership or sole proprietorship  or otherwise in the provi-
sion of commercial or business services to another, the criminal provi-
sions apply to those natural persons who have committed the acts. 
2 An employer or principal who is aware of the offence or becomes 
aware of the offence subsequently and who, although he is in a posi-
tion to do so, fails to prevent the offence or to remedy its consequenc-
es shall be liable to the same penalties as the offender.
3 If the employer or principal is a legal entity, general or limited 
partnership, sole proprietorship  or corporate body without legal 
personality, paragraph 2 applies to the culpable management bodies, 
members of the management bodies, executive partners, de facto 
managers or liquidators.
Art. 326ter  
Contravention of 
the law on 
business and 
other names
Any person who uses a name for a legal entity or branch entered in the 
Commercial Register that does not correspond to the name entered in 
the Commercial Register and which may be misleading,
any person who uses a misleading name for a legal entity or branch 
not entered in the Commercial Register, or
any person who gives the impression that a foreign legal entity not 
entered in the Commercial Register has its registered office or a 
branch in Switzerland,
shall be liable to a fine .
Art. 326quater  
Provision of 
false information 
by an employee 
benefits institu-
tion
Any person who as a management officer of an employee benefits 
institution is under a statutory obligation to provide information to 
beneficiaries and supervisory bodies but fails to provide any infor-
mation or provides false information shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 327 
Violation of 
obligations to 
give notice of the 
beneficial owner 
of shares or 
capital contribu-
tions 
Any person who wilfully fails to comply with obligations under Arti-
cle 697j paragraphs 1-4 or Article 790a paragraphs 1-4 of the CO  
to give notice of beneficial owner of shares or capital contributions 
shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 327a 
Violation of 
company law 
obligations on 
keeping registers
A person shall be liable to a fine if he or she wilfully fails to keep any 
of the following registers in accordance with the regulations or if he or 
she infringes associated company law obligations:
a.	in the case of a company limited by shares: the share register 
in accordance with Article 686 paragraphs 1-3 and 5 CO  or 
the register of the beneficial owners of the shares in accord-
ance with Article 697l CO;
b.	in the case of a limited liability company: the register of con-
tributions in accordance with Article 790 paragraphs 1-3 and 
5 CO or the register of the beneficial owners of the capital 
contributions in accordance with Article 790a paragraph 5 CO 
in conjunction with Article 697l CO;
c.	in the case of a cooperative: the register of cooperative mem-
bers in accordance with Article 837 paragraphs 1 and 2 CO;
d.	in the case of an investment company with variable capital 
(Art. 36 of the Collective Investment Schemes Act of 23 June 
2006 ); the share register recording the company sharehold-
ers or the register of the beneficial owners of the shares held 
by the company shareholders in accordance with Article 46 
paragraph 3 of the Collective Investment Schemes Act of 23 
June 2006.
Art. 327b 
Failure to 
comply with the 
statutory 
obligations of 
associations
Any person who wilfully fails to comply with the any of obligations 
for associations specified in Articles 61a and 69 paragraph 2 of the 
Civil Code  shall be liable to a fine.
Art. 328 
Art. 329
Breach of 
military secrecy
1.  Any person who unlawfully
enters buildings or any other places, the access to which is prohibited 
by the military authorities,
makes drawings, diagrams or plans or takes photographs or makes 
films of military establishments or objects serving the national de-
fence, or copies or publishes such drawings, diagrams, plans, photo-
graphs or films,
shall be liable to a fine.
2.  Attempts and complicity are also offences.
Art. 330 
Art. 331
Unauthorised 
wearing of the 
military uniform
Any person who wears the uniform of the Swiss armed forces without 
authority shall be liable to a fine. 
Art. 332 

Book Three:  Introduction and Application of the Code
Title One: 
Relationship between this Code and other Federal and 
Cantonal Acts
Art. 333 
Application of 
the General 
Provisions to 
other federal acts 
1 The general provisions of this Code apply to offences provided for in 
other federal acts unless these federal acts themselves contain detailed 
provisions on such offences.
2 In the other federal acts, the terms below are replaced as follows:
a.	penal servitude by a custodial sentence of more than one year;
b.	imprisonment by a custodial sentence not exceeding three 
years or by a monetary penalty;
c.	imprisonment for less than six months by a monetary penalty, 
whereby a one-month custodial sentence corresponds to a 
monetary penalty of 30 daily penalty units up to a maximum 
of 3000 francs.
3 An offence that carries a maximum penalty of detention or a fine or 
of a fine only is a contravention. Articles 106 and 107 apply. Article 8 
of the Federal Act of 22 March 1974  on Administrative Criminal 
Law is reserved. An offence is also a contravention if, in terms of 
another Federal Act that came into force before 1942, it carries a term 
of imprisonment not exceeding three months.
4 Sentences of lengths differing from those mentioned in paragraph 2 
and Article 41 as well as fines of amounts differing from those men-
tioned in Article 106 are reserved.
5 If another federal act provides for a fine to be imposed for a felony 
or misdemeanour, Article 34 applies. Rules on determining a penalty 
that differ from Article 34 do not apply. Article 8 of the Federal Act of 
22 March 1974 on Administrative Criminal Law remains reserved. If 
the fine is limited to a sum under 1 080 000 francs, this limit no longer 
applies. If the fine is limited to a sum exceeding 1 080 000 francs, this 
limit continues to apply. In this case, the maximum number of daily 
penalty units equals the current maximum fine divided by 3000.
6 ... 
6bis If an offence carries a custodial sentence or a monetary penalty 
with a minimum number of daily penalty units, the lower limit also 
applies to the minimum number of days in custody. 
7 The contraventions provided for in other federal acts are offences, 
even if they have been committed through negligence, unless only 
intentional commission is an offence in terms of the provision con-
cerned.
Art. 334
Reference to 
repealed 
provisions 
If reference is made in federal legislation to provisions being amended 
or repealed by this Code, the references relate to the provisions of this 
Code that regulate the matter.
Art. 335
Cantonal acts
1 The cantons retain the power to legislate on contraventions that are 
not the subject matter of federal legislation.
2 The cantons have the power to provide for sanctions for offences 
against cantonal administrative and procedural law.

Title Two: ...
Art. 336-338 

Title Three: ...
Art. 339-348 

Title Four: Administrative Assistance on Police Matters 
Art. 349 
Art. 349a 
1. Protection of 
personal data. 
a. Legal basis
The competent federal authorities may only disclose personal data if 
there is a legal basis for doing so under Article 36 paragraph 1 of the 
Data Protection Act of 25 September 2020  (FADP) or if: 
a.	disclosure of personal data is required to protect the life or 
physical integrity of the person concerned or of a third party;
b.	the person concerned has made their personal data general ac-
cessible and has not expressly prohibited the disclosure of the 
data.
Art. 349b 
b. Equal 
treatment
1 For the disclosure of personal data to the competent authorities of 
states linked to Switzerland by one of the Schengen association 
agreements (Schengen States), no stricter data protection rules may 
apply than for the disclosure of personal data to Swiss criminal author-
ities.
2 Special laws providing for stricter data protection rules for the dis-
closure of personal data to the competent foreign authorities do not 
apply to disclosure to the competent authorities of the Schengen 
States.
Art. 349c 
c. Disclosure of 
personal data to 
a third country or 
an international 
body
1 Personal data may not be disclosed to the competent authority of a 
state which is not linked to Switzerland by one of the Schengen asso-
ciation agreements (third country), or to an international body if this 
would seriously endanger the privacy of the data subjects, in particular 
due to a lack of adequate protection.
2 Adequate protection shall be ensured by:
a.	the legislation of the third country, if the European Union has 
so provided in a in a resolution;
b.	an international treaty;
c.	specific guarantees.
3 If the disclosing authority is a federal authority, it shall inform the 
Federal Data Protection and Information Commissioner (FDPIC) of 
the categories of disclosures of personal data made on the basis of 
specific guarantees pursuant to paragraph 2 letter c. Every disclosure 
is documented. 
4 By way of derogation from paragraph 1, personal data may be dis-
closed to the competent authority of a third country or an international 
body if disclosure is necessary in a particular case:
a.	to protect the life or the physical integrity of the data subject 
or of a third party;
b.	to prevent imminent serious danger threatening the public se-
curity of a Schengen or a third country;
c.	to prevent, detect or prosecute a criminal offence, provided 
that disclosure does not conflict with the overriding legitimate 
interests of the data subject;
d.	to exercise or enforce legal claims against an authority respon-
sible for the prevention, detection or prosecution of a criminal 
offence, provided that disclosure does not conflict with the 
overriding legitimate interests of the data subject.
5 If the disclosing authority is a federal authority, it shall inform the 
FDPIC  of the disclosures pursuant to paragraph 4.
Art. 349d 
d. Disclosure of 
personal data by 
a Schengen State 
to a third country 
or an interna-
tional body
1 Personal data transmitted or made available by a Schengen State 
may be disclosed to the competent authority of a third country or an 
international body, only if:
a.	the disclosure is necessary to prevent, detect or prosecute a 
criminal offence;
b.	the Schengen State which transmitted or made available the 
personal data has given its prior consent to the disclosure; and
c.	the requirements under Article 349c are fulfilled.
2 By way of derogation from paragraph 1 letter b, personal data may 
be disclosed in a particular case, if:
a.	the prior consent of the Schengen State not cannot be obtained 
in time; and
b.	disclosure is essential to prevent an imminent serious threat to 
the public security of a Schengen State or a third country or 
for safeguarding the essential interests of a Schengen State.
3 The Schengen State shall be informed immediately of the disclosure 
referred to in paragraph 2.
Art. 349e 
e. Disclosure of 
personal data to 
a recipient 
established in a 
third country
1 Where it is not possible, in particular in cases of emergency, to 
disclose personal data to the competent authority of a third country 
through the normal channels of police cooperation, the competent 
authority may exceptionally disclose them to a recipient established in 
that country, provided the following requirements are fulfilled:
a.	The disclosure is essential to fulfil a statutory task of the au-
thority disclosing the data.
b.	No overriding interests of the data subject worthy of protec-
tion stand in the way of disclosure.
2 The competent authority shall inform the recipient of the personal 
data at the time of disclosure that he may use the data only for the 
purposes specified by the authority.
3 It shall inform the competent authority of the third country without 
delay of any disclosure of personal data, provided it considers this 
appropriate.
4 If the responsible authority is a federal authority, it shall inform the 
FDPIC without delay of any disclosure pursuant to paragraph 1.
5 It shall document each disclosure of personal data. The Federal 
Council shall regulate the details.
Art. 349f 
f. Accuracy of 
personal data
1 The competent authority shall correct incorrect personal data without 
delay.
2 It shall notify the authority which transmitted the data, made them 
available or disclosed them of the correction without delay. 
3 It shall inform the recipient whether the data it has disclosed are up-
to-date and reliable. 
4 It shall also provide the recipient with any further information that 
can be used to distinguish:
a.	the different categories of data subjects;
b.	personal data based on facts and on personal assessments.
5 The obligation to inform the recipient ceases to apply if the infor-
mation referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 is clear from the personal 
data itself or from the circumstances.
Art. 349g 
g. Verification of 
the legality of 
the data pro-
cessing
1 The data subject may request the FDPIC to check whether any data 
relating to the data subject is being processed lawfully if:
a.	the data subject's right to information about the exchange of 
data about them is restricted or deferred (Art. 19 and 20 
FADP );
b.	his or her right to information is denied, restricted or deferred 
(Art. 25 and 26 FADP); or
c.	his or her right to request the rectification, destruction or dele-
tion of data relating to him or her is partially or completely 
denied (Art. 41 para. 2 let. a FADP). 
2 Only a federal authority under the supervision of the FDPIC may be 
examined.
3 The Commissioner shall complete the verification; he shall notify the 
data subject that either no data relating to him or her has been unlaw-
fully processed, or that he has opened an investigation pursuant to 
Article 49 FADP in the case of errors in the processing of personal 
data. 
4 If the FDPIC finds errors in the processing of the data, he shall order 
the competent federal authority to correct them.
5 The notification referred to in paragraph 3 shall always be worded in 
the same way and is not substantiated. It may not be contested.
Art. 349h 
h. Investigation
1 If a data subject credibly demonstrates that an exchange of personal 
data concerning him or her could violate the provisions on the protec-
tion of personal data, he or she may request the FDPIC to open an 
investigation pursuant to Article 49 FADP . 
2 An investigation may only be opened against a federal authority that 
is under the supervision of the FDPIC.
3 The parties are the data subject and the federal authority against 
which the investigation has been opened.
4 Articles 50 and 51 FADP also apply. 
Art. 350
2. Cooperation 
with INTERPOL
a. Jurisdiction 
1 The Federal Office of Police carries out the duties of a National 
Central Bureau in terms of the Constitution and General Regulations 
of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL).
2 It is responsible for coordinating the exchange of information be-
tween the federal and cantonal prosecution services on the one hand 
and the National Central Bureaus of other states and the General 
Secretariat of INTERPOL on the other. 
Art. 351
b. Tasks 
1 The Federal Office of Police coordinates the exchange of police 
information for the investigation and prosecution offences and for the 
execution of sentences and measures.
2 It may transmit police information for the purpose of preventing 
offences if there are specific indications that there is a serious proba-
bility of a felony or misdemeanour being committed.
3 It may coordinate the exchange of information relating to searches 
for missing persons and for the identification of unknown persons.
4 In the interest of preventing and investigating offences, the Federal 
Office of Police may receive and provide information from and to 
private individuals if this is in the interests of the persons concerned 
and their consent has been given or may be assumed in the circum-
stances.
Art. 352
c. Data protec-
tion 
1 The exchange of police information is governed by the principles of 
the Mutual Assistance Act of 20 March 1981  as well as the Consti-
tution and General Regulations of INTERPOL declared to be applica-
ble by the Federal Council.
2 The FADP  applies to the exchange of information in connection 
with searches for missing persons and the identification of unknown 
persons and for administrative purposes. 
3 The Federal Office may provide information directly to the Central 
Bureaus of other states provided the recipient state is subject to the 
INTERPOL data protection regulations.
Art. 353
d. Financial aid 
and other 
payments 
The Confederation may provide financial aid and make payments to 
INTERPOL.
Art. 354 
3. Cooperation in 
connection with 
the identification 
of persons
1 The responsible department shall register and store biometric crimi-
nal records data recorded and transmitted to the department by can-
tonal, federal and foreign authorities in connection with criminal 
proceedings or in fulfilment of other statutory duties. This data may be 
used for comparison purposes to identify a wanted or unknown per-
son.
2 The following authorities may use and process data in terms of 
paragraph 1:
a. 	the Federal Office of Police;
b. 	the State Secretariat for Migration (SEM);
c. 	the Federal Office of Justice;
d. 	the Federal Office for Customs and Border Security ;
e. 	the Swiss representations abroad responsible for issuing visas;
f. 	the Federal Intelligence Service;
g. 	the cantonal police authorities;
h. 	the cantonal migration authorities. 
3 Personal data that relates data in accordance with paragraph 1 shall 
be processed in separate information systems; the procedure is subject 
to the provisions of the Federal Act of 13 June 2008  on Federal 
Police Information Systems, the Asylum Act of 26 June 1998  and 
the Foreign Nationals and Integration Act of 16 December 2005  
and the Customs Act of 18 March 2005 .
4 The data may be used:
a. 	until the expiry of the deadlines for the deletion of DNA pro-
files specified in Articles 16-19 des DNA Profiling Act of 
20 June 2003 ; or
b. 	in the case of a conviction for a contravention: for up to five 
years from the date of the judgment, provided the judgment is 
final. 
5 The Federal Council shall regulate the details, and in particular the 
retention period for data that is recorded outside criminal proceedings, 
the deletion procedure and cooperation with the cantons. It shall 
regulate the transmission of criminal records data by the competent 
federal authorities and the cantons. 
6 SEM or the Federal Office of Police (fedpol) may transmit the data 
in an automated procedure to the national section of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS) for the purpose of issuing alerts. 
Art. 355 
4.  ...



Art. 355a 
5. Cooperation 
with Europol
a. Exchange of 
data 
1 fedpol and the Federal Intelligence Service (FIS) may pass on per-
sonal data, including sensitive personal data to the European Police 
Office (Europol).  
2 The passing on of such data is subject in particular to the require-
ments of Articles 3 and 10-13 of the Agreement of 24 September 
2004  between the Swiss Confederation and the European Police 
Office.
3 At the same time as passing on data, the Federal Office of Police 
shall notify Europol of the purpose for which the data is provided as 
well as of any restrictions with regard to its processing to which it is 
itself subject in accordance with federal or cantonal legislation.
4 The exchange of personal data with Europol is regarded as equiva-
lent to an exchange with a competent authority of a Schengen State 
(Art. 349b). 
Art. 355b 
b. Extension of 
mandate 
The Federal Council is authorised to agree with Europol amendments 
to the scope of its mandate in accordance with Article 3 paragraph 3 of 
the Agreement of 24 September 2004  between the Swiss Confeder-
ation and the European Police Office.
Art. 355c 
5bis. Cooperation 
under the 
Schengen 
Association 
Agreement.
Jurisdiction 
The federal and cantonal police authorities shall implement the provi-
sions of the Schengen Association Agreement  in accordance with 
domestic law.

Art. 355d 
5ter. ...

Art. 355e 
5quater. SIRENE 
Office
1 fedpol manages the central office for the exchange of supplementary 
information with the Schengen states (SIRENE Office). 
2 Das SIRENE Office is the contact, coordination and consultation 
point for the exchange of information in connection with the alerts in 
the SIS. It reviews the formal admissibility of Swiss and foreign alerts 
in the SIS.
Art. 355f-355g 
Art. 356-361 
Art. 362 
6. Notification in 
relation to 
pornography
If an investigating authority establishes that pornographic articles 
(Art. 197 para. 4) have been produced in or imported from a foreign 
state, it shall immediately notify the Federal Central Office for Com-
bating Pornography.



Title Five: ...
Art. 363 
Art. 364  

Title Six: ...
Art. 365-369 
Art. 369a 
Art. 370 and 371 
Art. 371a 

Title Seven: 
Execution of Sentences and Measures, Probation 
Assistance, Institutions and Facilities
Art. 372
1. Duty to 
execute sentenc-
es and measures
1 The cantons shall execute the judgments issued by their criminal 
courts on the basis of this Code. They are obliged to execute the 
judgments of the federal criminal justice authorities in return for the 
reimbursement of their costs.
2 Decisions in criminal cases made by police authorities and other 
competent authorities and the decisions of prosecution services are 
deemed equivalent to court judgments.
3 The cantons shall guarantee the uniform execution of criminal sanc-
tions. 
Art. 373
2. Monetary 
penalties, fines, 
costs and 
forfeitures
Execution
Legally binding decisions issued on the basis of federal or cantonal 
criminal law relating to monetary penalties, fines, costs and the forfei-
ture of property or assets may be executed anywhere in Switzerland.
Art. 374
Right of disposal
1 The cantons are entitled to the monetary penalties and fines imposed 
and the property and assets forfeited in accordance with this Code.
2 The Confederation is entitled to the proceeds of the cases judged by 
the Criminal or Appeals Chamber of the Federal Criminal Court. 
3 The use of proceeds for the benefit of persons harmed in accordance 
with Article 73 is reserved.
4 The provisions of the Federal Act of 19 March 2004  on the Divi-
sion of Forfeited Assets are reserved. 
Art. 375
3. Community 
service
1 The cantons are responsible for the execution of community service 
orders.
2 The competent authority decides on the nature and form of commu-
nity service to be performed.
3 The statutory maximum number of working hours may be exceeded 
in the performance of community service. The regulations on health 
and safety in the workplace remain applicable.
Art. 376
4. Probation 
assistance
1 The cantons organise the system of probation assistance. They may 
delegate this duty to private organisations.
2 Probation assistance is normally the responsibility of the canton in 
which the probationer is resident.
Art. 377
5. Institutions 
and facilities
Duty of the 
cantons to 
establish and 
operate
1 The cantons shall establish and operate institutions and institution 
units for prison inmates in open and secure custody as well as for 
prison inmates in semi-detention and in the day release employment.
2 They may also provide units for special inmate groups, and in par-
ticular for:
a.	women;
b.	prison inmates of specific age groups;
c.	prison inmates serving very long or very short sentences;
d.	prison inmates that require constant care or treatment or are 
receiving basic or advanced training.
3 They shall establish and operate the institutions provided for in this 
Code for the execution of measures.
4 They shall ensure that the regulations and the operation of the insti-
tutions and facilities comply with this Code.
5 They shall facilitate the basic and advanced training of the staff.
Art. 378
Cooperation 
between the 
cantons
1 The cantons may enter into agreements on the joint establishment 
and operation of institutions and facilities or secure themselves a right 
of joint use of the institutions and facilities belonging to other cantons.
2 The cantons shall inform each other of the special features of their 
institutions and facilities, and in particular of the range of care, treat-
ment and employment services; they shall cooperate in the allocation 
of prison inmates to institutions and facilities.
Art. 379
Licensing of 
private institu-
tions
1 The cantons may grant licences to privately run institutions and 
facilities authorising them to execute sentences in the form of semi-
detention and of day release employment together with measures 
under Articles 59-61 and 63.
2 Privately run institutions and facilities are subject to the supervision 
of the cantons.
Art. 380
Allocation of 
costs
1 The costs of the execution of sentences and measures are borne by 
the cantons.
2 The offender shall contribute in an appropriate manner to the costs:
a.	by performing work while serving a sentence or undergoing a 
measure; 
b.	in accordance with his income or assets if he refuses to per-
form work assigned to him even though the work satisfies the 
requirements of Articles 81 or 90 paragraph 3; or
c. 	by deduction of part of the income due to him as payment for 
an activity while in semi-detention, while subject to electronic 
monitoring, while on day release employment or while in ex-
ternal accommodation combined with day release employ-
ment.
3 The cantons shall issue detailed regulations on offenders' contribu-
tions to costs.

Title 7a:   
Liability in Cases of Discharge from Lifelong Incarceration
Art. 380a
1 If a person subject to lifelong incarceration is released on parole or 
discharged from incarceration and commits a felony mentioned in 
Article 64 paragraph 1bis, the responsible body politic shall be liable 
for the resultant injury and loss.
2 In relation to rights of recourse against the offender and the time 
limits for filing claims for damages or satisfaction, the provisions of 
the CO  on unlawful acts apply.
3 In relation to rights of recourse against the members of the authority 
issuing the order, cantonal law or the Government Liability Act of 14 
March 1958  applies.

Title Eight: Pardons, Amnesties, Re-opening of Cases
Art. 381
1. Pardons
Jurisdiction
The right to grant a pardon in relation to convictions based on this 
Code or any other federal act is exercised:
a. 	by the Federal Assembly in cases in which the Criminal or 
Appeals Chamber of the Federal Criminal Court or an admin-
istrative authority of the Confederation has passed judgment;
b.	by the pardons authority of the Canton in cases in which a 
cantonal authority has passed judgment.
Art. 382
Pardon petition
1 The petition for a pardon may be filed by the offender, his legal 
representative or, with consent of the offender, by his defence agent, 
spouse or registered partner. 
2 In the case of political felonies and misdemeanours and in the case 
offences connected with political felonies or misdemeanours, the 
Federal Council or the cantonal government is also entitled to initiate 
the pardon procedure.
3 The pardons authority may stipulate that the petition for a pardon 
that has been refused may not be filed again before the expiry of a 
certain period.
Art. 383
Effects
1 A pardon may wholly or partly remit all sentences imposed by 
legally binding judgment or commute the sentences to less severe 
forms of sentence.
2 The pardon decree specifies the extent of the pardon.
Art. 384
2. Amnesties
1 The Federal Assembly may grant an amnesty in criminal matters 
governed by this Code or any other federal act.
2 An amnesty excludes the prosecution of specific offences or catego-
ries offender and grants the remission of related sentences.
Art. 385
3. Re-opening 
of cases
In the case of convictions based on this Code or any other federal act, 
where important information or evidence comes to light that was not 
available to the court at the time of the earlier proceedings, the cantons 
must allow the re-opening of the case for the benefit of the offender.

Title Nine: 
Preventive Measures, Supplementary Provisions and 
General Transitional Provisions
Art. 386 
1. Preventive 
measures
1 The Confederation may employ investigative, educational and fur-
ther measures aimed at preventing specific offences and crime in 
general.
2 It may support projects that have the aim mentioned in paragraph 1.
3 It may participate in organisations that carry out measures mentioned 
in paragraph 1 or establish and support such organisations.
4 The Federal Council regulates the nature, aims and form of the 
preventive measures.
Art. 387
2. Supplemen-
tary provisions 
of the Federal 
Council
1 The Federal Council has the power person, after consulting the 
cantons, to enact provisions on:
a.	the execution of cumulative sentences, supplementary sen-
tences and cases where two or more individual sentences are 
executed simultaneously;
b.	the assignment of the responsibility for executing sentences 
and measures to another canton;
c.	the execution of sentences and measures imposed on persons 
suffering from illness or invalidity, or elderly persons;
d.	the execution of sentences and measures in cases under Article 
80 involving women;
e.	the wages paid to prison inmates in accordance with Article 
83.
1bis The Federal Council enacts the required provisions on the estab-
lishment of the Federal Commission for the Assessment of the Treata-
bility of Offenders subject to Lifelong Incarceration (Art. 64c para. 1) 
relating to the appointment of members of the Commission and their 
remuneration, procedures and the organisation of the Commission. 
2 The Federal Council may at the request of the responsible cantonal 
authority issue special provisions on the separation of the institutions 
of the Canton of the Ticino.
3 ... 
4 The Federal Council may by way of a trial and for limited time:
a.	introduce or permit new penalties and measures as well as new 
forms of execution and modify the scope of application of ex-
isting sanctions and forms of execution;
b.	introduce or permit the delegation of the execution of custodi-
al sentences to privately run institutions that satisfy the re-
quirements of this Code relating to the implementation of sen-
tences (Art. 74-85, 91 and 92). These institutions are subject to 
the supervision of the cantons.
5 The cantonal implementing provisions for the trial of new sanctions 
and forms of execution and the execution of sentences by privately run 
institutions (para. 4) require the approval of the Confederation in order 
to be valid.
Art. 388
3. General 
transitional 
provisions
Execution of 
earlier judgments
1 Judgments issued in application of the previous law are executed in 
accordance with the previous law. The exceptions in paragraphs 2 and 
3 are reserved.
2 Where an act that does not carry a penalty under the new law has led 
to conviction under the previous law, the sentence or measure imposed 
is no longer executed.
3 The provisions of the new law on the regime for the execution of 
sentences and measures and on the rights and obligations of prison 
inmates also apply to offenders who have been convicted in accord-
ance with the previous law.
Art. 389
Limitation
1 Unless the law provides otherwise, the provisions of the new statute 
of limitations for prosecution and the execution of sentences and 
measures, if they are less strict, also apply to offenders who have 
committed offences or been convicted before this Code comes into 
force.
2 The periods of time that have elapsed before the new law comes into 
force are taken into account.
Art. 390
Offences 
prosecuted on 
complaint
1 In the case offences that are only prosecuted on complaint, the 
period for filing a complaint is calculated in accordance with the law 
that applied at the time of the offence.
2 If the new law requires a complaint to be filed in respect of an offence 
that was prosecuted ex officio under the previous law, the period for 
filing the complaint begins when the new law comes into force. If the 
prosecution has already been initiated, it may only be continued if a 
complaint is filed.
3 If the new law stipulates the ex officio prosecution of an offence that 
was only prosecuted on complaint under the previous law, an offence 
committed before the new law comes into force is only prosecuted if a 
complaint is filed.
Art. 391
4. Cantonal 
transitional 
provisions
The cantons shall notify the Confederation of the required transitional 
provisions to the Swiss Criminal Code.
Art. 392
5. Commence-
ment of this 
Code
This Code comes into force on 1 January 1942.

Final Provisions of the Amendment of 18 March 1971 

Final Provisions of the Amendment of 13 December 2002 
1. Execution of sentences
1 Article 46 applies to the revocation of the suspended execution of a sentence 
ordered under the previous law. The court may impose a monetary penalty (Art. 34-
36) or community service (Art. 37-39) instead of a custodial sentence.
2 The secondary penalties imposed under the previous law of disqualification from 
holding public office (prev. Art. 51 ), revocation of parental authority and placing 
under guardianship (prev. Art. 53 ), expulsion due to conviction for an offence 
(prev. Art.. 55 ), prohibition from entering premises licensed to sell alcohol (prev. 
Art.. 56 ) are repealed when the new law comes into force.
3 The provisions of the new law on the execution of custodial sentences (Art. 74-85, 
91 and 92) and on probation assistance, conduct orders and the voluntary social 
supervision (Art. 93-96) also apply to offenders who were convicted under the 
previous law.
2.  Imposition and execution of measures
1 The provisions of the new law on measures (Art. 56-65) and on the execution of 
measures (Art. 90) also apply to offenders who committed an offence or were 
convicted before the new law comes into force. However the following also applies:
a.	The retrospective ordering of indefinite incarceration in accordance with 
Article 65 paragraph 2 is permitted only if indefinite incarceration would 
have been possible on the basis of Article 42 or 43 number 1 paragraph 2 of 
the previous law.
b.	The detention of young adults in a vocational training institution (Art. 100bis 
in its version of 18 March 1971 ) and any measure for young adults (Art. 
61) may not be for a period in excess of four years.
2 Until twelve months at the latest after the new law comes into force, the court shall 
assess whether persons indefinitely incarcerated under Articles 42 or 43 number 1 
paragraph 2 of the previous law fulfil the requirements for imposing a therapeutic 
measure (Art. 59-61 or 63). If they do, the court shall impose the relevant; if not, 
indefinite incarceration is continued in accordance with the new law.
3.  ...
4. Institutions for the execution of measures
The cantons shall establish institutions for the implementation of measures under 
Articles 59 paragraph 3 and 64 paragraph 3 within ten years at the latest of these 
amendments coming into force.

Transitional Provision to the Amendment of 26 September 2014 
The right to information under Article 92a also applies to the execution of sentences 
and measures that was ordered under the previous law.

Transitional Provision to the Amendment of 12 December 2014 
Article 305bis does not apply to aggravated tax misdemeanours as defined in Article 
305bis number 1bis that were committed before the amendment of 12 December 2014 
comes into force.

Transitional Provision to the Amendment of 19 June 2015 
If the offender was sentenced under the previous law to a monetary penalty of more 
than 180 daily penalty units within the five years prior to the offence the sentence 
may only be suspended (Art. 42 para. 1) where the circumstances are especially 
favourable.
Inhaltsverzeichnis
Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Bestimmungen
Erster Teil: Verbrechen und Vergehen
Erster Titel: Geltungsbereich
1. Keine Sanktion ohne Gesetz	Art. 1
2. Zeitlicher Geltungsbereich	Art. 2
3. Raumlicher Geltungsbereich.
Verbrechen oder Vergehen im Inland	Art. 3
Verbrechen oder Vergehen im Ausland gegen den Staat	Art. 4
Straftaten gegen Minderjahrige im Ausland	Art. 5
Gemass staatsvertraglicher Verpflichtung verfolgte 
Auslandtaten	Art. 6
Andere Auslandtaten	Art. 7
Begehungsort	Art. 8
4. Personlicher Geltungsbereich	Art. 9
Zweiter Titel: Strafbarkeit
1. Verbrechen und Vergehen.
Begriff	Art. 10
Begehen durch Unterlassen	Art. 11
2. Vorsatz und Fahrlassigkeit.
Begriffe	Art. 12
Sachverhaltsirrtum	Art. 13
3. Rechtmassige Handlungen und Schuld.
Gesetzlich erlaubte Handlung	Art. 14
Rechtfertigende Notwehr	Art. 15
Entschuldbare Notwehr	Art. 16
Rechtfertigender Notstand	Art. 17
Entschuldbarer Notstand	Art. 18
Schuldunfahigkeit und verminderte Schuldfahigkeit	Art. 19
Zweifelhafte Schuldfahigkeit	Art. 20
Irrtum uber die Rechtswidrigkeit	Art. 21
4. Versuch.
Strafbarkeit des Versuchs	Art. 22
Rucktritt und tatige Reue	Art. 23
5. Teilnahme.
Anstiftung	Art. 24
Gehilfenschaft	Art. 25
Teilnahme am Sonderdelikt	Art. 26
Personliche Verhaltnisse	Art. 27
6. Strafbarkeit der Medien	Art. 28
Quellenschutz	Art. 28a
7. Vertretungsverhaltnisse	Art. 29
8. Strafantrag.
Antragsrecht	Art. 30
Antragsfrist	Art. 31
Unteilbarkeit	Art. 32
Ruckzug	Art. 33
Dritter Titel: Strafen und Massnahmen
Erstes Kapitel: Strafen
Erster Abschnitt: Geldstrafe und Freiheitsstrafe
1. Geldstrafe.
Bemessung	Art. 34
Vollzug	Art. 35
Ersatzfreiheitsstrafe	Art. 36
2. Aufgehoben	Art. 37-39
3. Freiheitsstrafe.
Dauer	Art. 40
Freiheitsstrafe anstelle von Geldstrafe	Art. 41
Zweiter Abschnitt: Bedingte und teilbedingte Strafen
1. Bedingte Strafen	Art. 42
2. Teilbedingte Freiheitsstrafe	Art. 43
3. Gemeinsame Bestimmungen.
Probezeit	Art. 44
Bewahrung	Art. 45
Nichtbewahrung	Art. 46
Dritter Abschnitt: Strafzumessung
1. Grundsatz	Art. 47
2. Strafmilderung.
Grunde	Art. 48
Wirkung	Art. 48a
3. Konkurrenz	Art. 49
4. Begrundungspflicht	Art. 50
5. Anrechnung der Untersuchungshaft	Art. 51
Vierter Abschnitt:  
Strafbefreiung sowie Sistierung und Einstellung 
des Verfahrens
1. Grunde fur die Strafbefreiung.
Fehlendes Strafbedurfnis	Art. 52
Wiedergutmachung	Art. 53
Betroffenheit des Taters durch seine Tat	Art. 54
2. Gemeinsame Bestimmungen	Art. 55
3. Sistierung und Einstellung des Verfahrens. Ehegatte, 
eingetragene Partnerin, eingetragener Partner oder 
Lebenspartner als Opfer	Art. 55a
Zweites Kapitel: Massnahmen
Erster Abschnitt:  
Therapeutische Massnahmen und Verwahrung
1. Grundsatze	Art. 56
Zusammentreffen von Massnahmen	Art. 56a
Verhaltnis der Massnahmen zu den Strafen	Art. 57
Vollzug	Art. 58
2. Stationare therapeutische Massnahmen.
Behandlung von psychischen Storungen	Art. 59
Suchtbehandlung	Art. 60
Massnahmen fur junge Erwachsene	Art. 61
Bedingte Entlassung	Art. 62
Nichtbewahrung	Art. 62a
Endgultige Entlassung	Art. 62b
Aufhebung der Massnahme	Art. 62c
Prufung der Entlassung und der Aufhebung	Art. 62d
3. Ambulante Behandlung.
Voraussetzungen und Vollzug	Art. 63
Aufhebung der Massnahme	Art. 63a
Vollzug der aufgeschobenen Freiheitsstrafe	Art. 63b
4. Verwahrung.
Voraussetzungen und Vollzug	Art. 64
Aufhebung und Entlassung	Art. 64a
Prufung der Entlassung	Art. 64b
Prufung der Entlassung aus der lebenslanglichen  
Verwahrung und bedingte Entlassung	Art. 64c
5. Anderung der Sanktion	Art. 65
Zweiter Abschnitt: Andere Massnahmen
1. Friedensburgschaft	Art. 66
1a. Landesverweisung
a. Obligatorische Landesverweisung	Art. 66a
b. Nicht obligatorische Landesverweisung	Art. 66abis
c. Gemeinsame Bestimmungen. Wiederholungsfall	Art. 66b
d. Zeitpunkt des Vollzugs	Art. 66c
e. Aufschub des Vollzugs der obligatorischen Landes-
verweisung	Art. 66d
2. Tatigkeitsverbot, Kontakt- und Rayonverbot
a. Tatigkeitsverbot, Voraussetzungen	Art. 67
Inhalt und Umfang	Art. 67a
b. Kontakt- und Rayonverbot	Art. 67b
c. Gemeinsame Bestimmungen. Vollzug der Verbote	Art. 67c
Anderung eines Verbots oder nachtragliche Anordnung 
eines Verbots	Art. 67d
3. Fahrverbot	Art. 67e
Gegenstandslos	Art. 67f
4. Veroffentlichung des Urteils	Art. 68
5. Einziehung.
a. Sicherungseinziehung	Art. 69
b. Einziehung von Vermogenswerten.
Grundsatze	Art. 70
Ersatzforderungen	Art. 71
Einziehung von Vermogenswerten einer kriminellen oder 
terroristischen Organisation	Art. 72
6. Verwendung zu Gunsten des Geschadigten	Art. 73
Vierter Titel: Vollzug von Freiheitsstrafen und 
freiheitsentziehenden Massnahmen
1. Vollzugsgrundsatze	Art. 74
2. Vollzug von Freiheitsstrafen.
Grundsatze	Art. 75
Besondere Sicherheitsmassnahmen	Art. 75a
Vollzugsort	Art. 76
Normalvollzug	Art. 77
Arbeitsexternat und Wohnexternat	Art. 77a
Halbgefangenschaft	Art. 77b
Einzelhaft	Art. 78
Aufgehoben	Art. 79
Gemeinnutzige Arbeit	Art. 79a
Elektronische Uberwachung	Art. 79b
Abweichende Vollzugsformen	Art. 80
Arbeit	Art. 81
Aus- und Weiterbildung	Art. 82
Arbeitsentgelt	Art. 83
Beziehungen zur Aussenwelt	Art. 84
Kontrollen und Untersuchungen	Art. 85
Bedingte Entlassung.
a. Gewahrung	Art. 86
b. Probezeit	Art. 87
c. Bewahrung	Art. 88
d. Nichtbewahrung	Art. 89
3. Vollzug von Massnahmen	Art. 90
4. Gemeinsame Bestimmungen.
Disziplinarrecht	Art. 91
Unterbrechung des Vollzugs	Art. 92
Informationsrecht	Art. 92a
Funfter Titel: Bewahrungshilfe, Weisungen und 
freiwillige soziale Betreuung
Bewahrungshilfe	Art. 93
Weisungen	Art. 94
Gemeinsame Bestimmungen	Art. 95
Soziale Betreuung	Art. 96
Sechster Titel: Verjahrung
1. Verfolgungsverjahrung.
Fristen	Art. 97
Beginn	Art. 98
2. Vollstreckungsverjahrung.
Fristen	Art. 99
Beginn	Art. 100
3. Unverjahrbarkeit	Art. 101
Siebenter Titel: Verantwortlichkeit des Unternehmens
Strafbarkeit	Art. 102
Aufgehoben	Art. 102a
Zweiter Teil: Ubertretungen
Begriff	Art. 103
Anwendbarkeit der Bestimmungen des Ersten Teils	Art. 104
Keine oder bedingte Anwendbarkeit	Art. 105
Busse	Art. 106
Aufgehoben	Art. 107
	Art. 108
Verjahrung	Art. 109
Dritter Teil: Begriffe
	Art. 110
Zweites Buch: Besondere Bestimmungen
Erster Titel: Strafbare Handlungen gegen Leib und 
Leben
1. Totung.
Vorsatzliche Totung	Art. 111
Mord	Art. 112
Totschlag	Art. 113
Totung auf Verlangen	Art. 114
Verleitung und Beihilfe zum Selbstmord	Art. 115
Kindestotung	Art. 116
Fahrlassige Totung	Art. 117
2. Schwangerschaftsabbruch.
Strafbarer Schwangerschaftsabbruch	Art. 118
Strafloser Schwangerschaftsabbruch	Art. 119
Ubertretungen durch Arztinnen oder Arzte	Art. 120
Aufgehoben	Art. 121
3. Korperverletzung.
Schwere Korperverletzung	Art. 122
Einfache Korperverletzung	Art. 123
Verstummelung weiblicher Genitalien	Art. 124
Fahrlassige Korperverletzung	Art. 125
Tatlichkeiten	Art. 126
4. Gefahrdung des Lebens und der Gesundheit.
Aussetzung	Art. 127
Unterlassung der Nothilfe	Art. 128
Falscher Alarm	Art. 128bis
Gefahrdung des Lebens	Art. 129
Aufgehoben	Art. 130-132
Raufhandel	Art. 133
Angriff	Art. 134
Gewaltdarstellungen	Art. 135
Verabreichen gesundheitsgefahrdender Stoffe an Kinder	Art. 136
Zweiter Titel: Strafbare Handlungen gegen das 
Vermogen
1. Strafbare Handlungen gegen das Vermogen.
Unrechtmassige Aneignung	Art. 137
Veruntreuung	Art. 138
Diebstahl	Art. 139
Raub	Art. 140
Sachentziehung	Art. 141
Unrechtmassige Verwendung von Vermogenswerten	Art. 141bis
Unrechtmassige Entziehung von Energie	Art. 142
Unbefugte Datenbeschaffung	Art. 143
Unbefugtes Eindringen in ein Datenverarbeitungssystem	Art. 143bis
Sachbeschadigung	Art. 144
Datenbeschadigung	Art. 144bis
Veruntreuung und Entzug von Pfandsachen und 
Retentionsgegenstanden	Art. 145
Betrug	Art. 146
Betrugerischer Missbrauch einer Datenverarbeitungsanlage	Art. 147
Check- und Kreditkartenmissbrauch	Art. 148
Unrechtmassiger Bezug von Leistungen einer 
Sozialversicherung oder der Sozialhilfe	Art. 148a
Zechprellerei	Art. 149
Erschleichen einer Leistung	Art. 150
Herstellen und Inverkehrbringen von Materialien zur 
unbefugten Entschlusselung codierter Angebote	Art. 150bis
Arglistige Vermogensschadigung	Art. 151
Unwahre Angaben uber kaufmannische Gewerbe	Art. 152
Unwahre Angaben gegenuber Handelsregisterbehorden	Art. 153
Strafbarkeit der Mitglieder des Verwaltungsrats und der 
Geschaftsleitung von Gesellschaften, deren Aktien an einer 
Borse kotiert sind	Art. 154
Warenfalschung	Art. 155
Erpressung	Art. 156
Wucher	Art. 157
Ungetreue Geschaftsbesorgung	Art. 158
Missbrauch von Lohnabzugen	Art. 159
Hehlerei	Art. 160
Aufgehoben	Art. 161-161bis
2. Verletzung des Fabrikations- oder Geschaftsgeheimnisses	Art. 162
3. Konkurs- und Betreibungsverbrechen oder -vergehen.
Betrugerischer Konkurs und Pfandungsbetrug	Art. 163
Glaubigerschadigung durch Vermogensminderung	Art. 164
Misswirtschaft	Art. 165
Unterlassung der Buchfuhrung	Art. 166
Bevorzugung eines Glaubigers	Art. 167
Bestechung bei Zwangsvollstreckung	Art. 168
Verfugung uber mit Beschlag belegte Vermogenswerte	Art. 169
Erschleichung eines gerichtlichen Nachlassvertrages	Art. 170
Gerichtlicher Nachlassvertrag	Art. 171
Aufgehoben	Art. 171bis
4. Allgemeine Bestimmungen.
Aufgehoben	Art. 172 und 172bis
Geringfugige Vermogensdelikte	Art. 172ter
Dritter Titel: Strafbare Handlungen gegen die Ehre und 
den Geheim- oder Privatbereich
1. Ehrverletzungen
Uble Nachrede	Art. 173
Verleumdung	Art. 174
Uble Nachrede oder Verleumdung gegen einen 
Verstorbenen oder einen verschollen Erklarten	Art. 175
Gemeinsame Bestimmung	Art. 176
Beschimpfung	Art. 177
Verjahrung	Art. 178
2. Strafbare Handlungen gegen den Geheim- oder 
Privatbereich.
Verletzung des Schriftgeheimnisses	Art. 179
Abhoren und Aufnehmen fremder Gesprache	Art. 179bis
Unbefugtes Aufnehmen von Gesprachen	Art. 179ter
Verletzung des Geheim- oder Privatbereichs durch 
Aufnahmegerate	Art. 179quater
Nicht strafbares Aufnehmen	Art. 179quinquies
Inverkehrbringen und Anpreisen von Abhor-, Ton-   
und Bildaufnahmegeraten	Art. 179sexies
Missbrauch einer Fernmeldeanlage	Art. 179septies
Amtliche Uberwachung, Straflosigkeit	Art. 179octies
Unbefugtes Beschaffen von Personendaten	Art. 179novies
Identitatsmissbrauch	Art. 179decies
Vierter Titel:  
Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen die Freiheit
Drohung	Art. 180
Notigung	Art. 181
Zwangsheirat, erzwungene eingetragene Partnerschaft	Art. 181a
Menschenhandel	Art. 182
Freiheitsberaubung und Entfuhrung	Art. 183
Erschwerende Umstande	Art. 184
Geiselnahme	Art. 185
Verschwindenlassen	Art. 185bis
Hausfriedensbruch	Art. 186
Funfter Titel:  
Strafbare Handlungen gegen die sexuelle Integritat
1. Sexuelle Handlungen mit Kindern	Art. 187
2. Angriffe auf die sexuelle Freiheit und Unversehrtheit.
Sexuelle Handlungen mit Abhangigen	Art. 188
Sexueller Ubergriff und sexuelle Notigung	Art. 189
Vergewaltigung	Art. 190
Missbrauch einer urteilsunfahigen oder zum Widerstand 
unfahigen Person	Art. 191
Aufgehoben	Art. 192
Ausnutzung einer Notlage oder Abhangigkeit	Art. 193
Tauschung uber den sexuellen Charakter einer Handlung	Art. 193a
Exhibitionismus	Art. 194
3. Ausnutzung sexueller Handlungen.
Forderung der Prostitution	Art. 195
Sexuelle Handlungen mit Minderjahrigen gegen Entgelt	Art. 196
4. Pornografie	Art. 197
5. Unbefugtes Weiterleiten von  
nicht offentlichen sexuellen Inhalten	Art. 197a
6. Ubertretungen gegen die sexuelle Integritat.
Sexuelle Belastigungen	Art. 198
Unzulassige Ausubung der Prostitution	Art. 199
7. Gemeinsame Begehung	Art. 200
Aufgehoben und ersetzt	Art. 201-212
Sechster Titel: Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen die Familie
Inzest	Art. 213
Aufgehoben	Art. 214
Mehrfache Ehe oder eingetragene Partnerschaft	Art. 215
Aufgehoben	Art. 216
Vernachlassigung von Unterhaltspflichten	Art. 217
Aufgehoben	Art. 218
Verletzung der Fursorge- oder Erziehungspflicht	Art. 219
Entziehen von Minderjahrigen	Art. 220
Siebenter Titel:  
Gemeingefahrliche Verbrechen und Vergehen
Brandstiftung	Art. 221
Fahrlassige Verursachung einer Feuersbrunst	Art. 222
Verursachung einer Explosion	Art. 223
Gefahrdung durch Sprengstoffe und giftige Gase in  
verbrecherischer Absicht	Art. 224
Gefahrdung ohne verbrecherische Absicht und fahrlassige 
Gefahrdung	Art. 225
Herstellen, Verbergen, Weiterschaffen von Sprengstoffen 
und giftigen Gasen	Art. 226
Gefahrdung durch Kernenergie, Radioaktivitat und  
ionisierende Strahlen	Art. 226bis
Strafbare Vorbereitungshandlungen	Art. 226ter
Verursachen einer Uberschwemmung oder eines Einsturzes	Art. 227
Beschadigung von elektrischen Anlagen, Wasserbauten und 
Schutzvorrichtungen	Art. 228
Gefahrdung durch Verletzung der Regeln der Baukunde	Art. 229
Beseitigung oder Nichtanbringung von 
Sicherheitsvorrichtungen	Art. 230
Achter Titel: Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen die 
offentliche Gesundheit
Gefahrdung durch gentechnisch veranderte oder pathogene 
Organismen	Art. 230bis
Verbreiten menschlicher Krankheiten	Art. 231
Verbreiten von Tierseuchen	Art. 232
Verbreiten von Schadlingen	Art. 233
Verunreinigung von Trinkwasser	Art. 234
Herstellen von gesundheitsschadlichem Futter	Art. 235
Inverkehrbringen von gesundheitsschadlichem Futter	Art. 236
Neunter Titel: Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen 
den offentlichen Verkehr
Storung des offentlichen Verkehrs	Art. 237
Aufgehoben	Art. 238
Storung von Betrieben im Dienste der Allgemeinheit	Art. 239
Zehnter Titel: Falschung von Geld, amtlichen 
Wertzeichen, amtlichen Zeichen, Mass und Gewicht
Geldfalschung	Art. 240
Geldverfalschung	Art. 241
In Umlaufsetzen falschen Geldes	Art. 242
Nachmachen von Banknoten, Munzen oder amtlichen 
Wertzeichen ohne Falschungsabsicht	Art. 243
Einfuhren, Erwerben, Lagern falschen Geldes	Art. 244
Falschung amtlicher Wertzeichen	Art. 245
Falschung amtlicher Zeichen	Art. 246
Falschungsgerate; unrechtmassiger Gebrauch von Geraten	Art. 247
Falschung von Mass und Gewicht	Art. 248
Einziehung	Art. 249
Geld und Wertzeichen des Auslandes	Art. 250
Elfter Titel: Urkundenfalschung
Urkundenfalschung	Art. 251
Falschung von Ausweisen	Art. 252
Erschleichung einer falschen Beurkundung	Art. 253
Unterdruckung von Urkunden	Art. 254
Urkunden des Auslandes	Art. 255
Grenzverruckung	Art. 256
Beseitigung von Vermessungs- und Wasserstandszeichen	Art. 257
Zwolfter Titel:  
Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen den offentlichen Frieden
Schreckung der Bevolkerung	Art. 258
Offentliche Aufforderung zu Verbrechen oder zur 
Gewalttatigkeit	Art. 259
Landfriedensbruch	Art. 260
Strafbare Vorbereitungshandlungen	Art. 260bis
Kriminelle und terroristische Organisationen	Art. 260ter
Gefahrdung der offentlichen Sicherheit mit Waffen	Art. 260quater
Finanzierung des Terrorismus	Art. 260quinquies
Anwerbung, Ausbildung und Reisen im  
Hinblick auf eine terroristische Straftat	Art. 260sexies
Storung der Glaubens- und Kultusfreiheit	Art. 261
Diskriminierung und Aufruf zu Hass	Art. 261bis
Storung des Totenfriedens	Art. 262
Verubung einer Tat in selbstverschuldeter Unzurechnungs- 
fahigkeit	Art. 263
Zwolfter Titelbis:  
Volkermord und Verbrechen gegen die Menschlichkeit
Volkermord	Art. 264
Verbrechen gegen die Menschlichkeit	Art. 264a
a. Vorsatzliche Totung
b. Ausrottung
c. Versklavung
d. Freiheitsberaubung
e. Verschwindenlassen von Personen
f. Folter
g. Verletzung der sexuellen Selbstbestimmung
h. Vertreibung oder zwangsweise Uberfuhrung
i. Verfolgung und Apartheid
j. Andere unmenschliche Handlungen
Zwolfter Titelter: Kriegsverbrechen
1. Anwendungsbereich	Art. 264b
2. Schwere Verletzungen der Genfer Konventionen	Art. 264c
3. Andere Kriegsverbrechen
a. Angriffe gegen zivile Personen und Objekte	Art. 264d
b. Ungerechtfertigte medizinische Behandlung, Verletzung 
der sexuellen Selbstbestimmung und der Menschenwurde	Art. 264e
c. Rekrutierung und Verwendung von Kindersoldaten	Art. 264f
d. Verbotene Methoden der Kriegfuhrung	Art. 264g
e. Einsatz verbotener Waffen	Art. 264h
4. Bruch eines Waffenstillstandes oder des Friedens. 
Vergehen gegen einen Parlamentar. Verzogerte 
Heimschaffung von Kriegsgefangenen	Art. 264i
5. Andere Verstosse gegen das humanitare Volkerrecht	Art. 264j
Zwolfter Titelquater:  
Gemeinsame Bestimmungen fur den zwolften Titelbis und 
den zwolften Titelter
Strafbarkeit des Vorgesetzten	Art. 264k
Handeln auf Befehl oder Anordnung	Art. 264l
Auslandtaten	Art. 264m
Ausschluss der relativen Immunitat	Art. 264n

Dreizehnter Titel: Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen 
den Staat und die Landesverteidigung
1. Verbrechen oder Vergehen gegen den Staat.
Hochverrat	Art. 265
Angriffe auf die Unabhangigkeit der Eidgenossenschaft	Art. 266
Gegen die Sicherheit der Schweiz gerichtete auslandische 
Unternehmungen und Bestrebungen	Art. 266bis
Diplomatischer Landesverrat	Art. 267
Verruckung staatlicher Grenzzeichen	Art. 268
Verletzung schweizerischer Gebietshoheit	Art. 269
Tatliche Angriffe auf schweizerische Hoheitszeichen	Art. 270
Verbotene Handlungen fur einen fremden Staat	Art. 271
2. Verbotener Nachrichtendienst.
Politischer Nachrichtendienst	Art. 272
Wirtschaftlicher Nachrichtendienst	Art. 273
Militarischer Nachrichtendienst	Art. 274
3. Gefahrdung der verfassungsmassigen Ordnung.
Angriffe auf die verfassungsmassige Ordnung	Art. 275
Aufgehoben	Art. 275bis und 275ter
4. Storung der militarischen Sicherheit.
Aufforderung und Verleitung zur Verletzung militarischer 
Dienstpflichten	Art. 276
Falschung von Aufgeboten oder Weisungen	Art. 277
Storung des Militardienstes	Art. 278
Vierzehnter Titel: Vergehen gegen den Volkswillen
Storung und Hinderung von Wahlen und Abstimmungen	Art. 279
Eingriffe in das Stimm- und Wahlrecht	Art. 280
Wahlbestechung	Art. 281
Wahlfalschung	Art. 282
Stimmenfang	Art. 282bis
Verletzung des Abstimmungs- und Wahlgeheimnisses	Art. 283
Aufgehoben	Art. 284
Funfzehnter Titel:  
Strafbare Handlungen gegen die offentliche Gewalt
Gewalt und Drohung gegen Behorden und Beamte	Art. 285
Hinderung einer Amtshandlung	Art. 286
Amtsanmassung	Art. 287
Aufgehoben	Art. 288
Bruch amtlicher Beschlagnahme	Art. 289
Siegelbruch	Art. 290
Verweisungsbruch	Art. 291
Ungehorsam gegen amtliche Verfugungen	Art. 292
Veroffentlichung amtlicher geheimer Verhandlungen	Art. 293
Missachtung eines Tatigkeitsverbots oder eines Kontakt- 
und Rayonverbots	Art. 294
Missachtung von Bewahrungshilfe oder Weisungen	Art. 295
Sechzehnter Titel: Storung der Beziehungen zum Ausland
Beleidigung eines fremden Staates	Art. 296
Beleidigung zwischenstaatlicher Organisationen	Art. 297
Tatliche Angriffe auf fremde Hoheitszeichen	Art. 298
Verletzung fremder Gebietshoheit	Art. 299
Feindseligkeiten gegen einen Kriegfuhrenden oder fremde 
Truppen	Art. 300
Nachrichtendienst gegen fremde Staaten	Art. 301
Strafverfolgung	Art. 302
Siebzehnter Titel:  
Verbrechen und Vergehen gegen die Rechtspflege
Falsche Anschuldigung	Art. 303
Irrefuhrung der Rechtspflege	Art. 304
Begunstigung	Art. 305
Geldwascherei	Art. 305bis
Mangelnde Sorgfalt bei Finanzgeschaften und Melderecht	Art. 305ter
Falsche Beweisaussage der Partei	Art. 306
Falsches Zeugnis. Falsches Gutachten. Falsche Ubersetzung	Art. 307
Strafmilderung oder Straflosigkeit	Art. 308
Verwaltungssachen und Verfahren vor internationalen 
Gerichten	Art. 309
Befreiung von Gefangenen	Art. 310
Meuterei von Gefangenen	Art. 311
Achtzehnter Titel:  
Strafbare Handlungen gegen die Amts- und Berufspflicht
Amtsmissbrauch	Art. 312
Gebuhrenuberforderung	Art. 313
Ungetreue Amtsfuhrung	Art. 314
Aufgehoben	Art. 315-316
Urkundenfalschung im Amt	Art. 317
Nicht strafbare Handlungen	Art. 317bis
Falsches arztliches Zeugnis	Art. 318
Entweichenlassen von Gefangenen	Art. 319
Verletzung des Amtsgeheimnisses	Art. 320
Verletzung des Berufsgeheimnisses	Art. 321
Berufsgeheimnis in der Forschung am Menschen	Art. 321bis
Verletzung des Post- und Fernmeldegeheimnisses	Art. 321ter
Verletzung der Auskunftspflicht der Medien	Art. 322
Nichtverhinderung einer strafbaren Veroffentlichung	Art. 322bis
Neunzehnter Titel: Bestechung
1. Bestechung schweizerischer Amtstrager
Bestechen	Art. 322ter
Sich bestechen lassen	Art. 322quater
Vorteilsgewahrung	Art. 322quinquies
Vorteilsannahme	Art. 322sexies
2. Bestechung fremder Amtstrager	Art. 322septies
3. Bestechung Privater 
Bestechen	Art. 322octies
Sich bestechen lassen	Art. 322novies
4. Gemeinsame Bestimmungen	Art. 322decies
Zwanzigster Titel:  
Ubertretungen bundesrechtlicher Bestimmungen
Ungehorsam des Schuldners im Betreibungs- und 
Konkursverfahren	Art. 323
Ungehorsam dritter Personen im Betreibungs-, Konkurs- und 
Nachlassverfahren	Art. 324
Ordnungswidrige Fuhrung der Geschaftsbucher	Art. 325
Verletzung der Vorschriften betreffend die Berichterstattung 
uber Zahlungen an staatliche Stellen	Art. 325bis
Verletzung anderer Berichtspflichten	Art. 325ter
Widerhandlungen gegen die Bestimmungen zum Schutz der 
Mieter von Wohn- und Geschaftsraumen	Art. 325quater
Anwendung auf juristische Personen, Handelsgesellschaften 
und Einzelfirmen
1. ...	Art. 326
2. im Falle von Artikel 325quater	Art. 326bis
Ubertretung firmen- und namensrechtlicher Bestimmungen	Art. 326ter
Unwahre Auskunft durch eine Personalvorsorgeeinrichtung	Art. 326quater
Verletzung der Pflichten zur Meldung der an Aktien oder 
Stammanteilen wirtschaftlich berechtigten Person	Art. 327
Verletzung der gesellschaftsrechtlichen Pflichten zur Fuhrung 
von Verzeichnissen	Art. 327a
Verletzung gesetzlicher Pflichten von Vereinen	Art. 327b
Aufgehoben	Art. 328
Verletzung militarischer Geheimnisse	Art. 329
Aufgehoben	Art. 330
Unbefugtes Tragen der militarischen Uniform	Art. 331
Aufgehoben	Art. 332
Drittes Buch: Einfuhrung und Anwendung des 
Gesetzes
Erster Titel: Verhaltnis dieses Gesetzes zu andern 
Gesetzen des Bundes und zu den Gesetzen der Kantone
Anwendung des Allgemeinen Teils auf andere 
Bundesgesetze	Art. 333
Verweisung auf aufgehobene Bestimmungen	Art. 334
Gesetze der Kantone	Art. 335
Zweiter Titel: ...
Aufgehoben	Art. 336-338
Dritter Titel: ...
Aufgehoben	Art. 339-348
Vierter Titel: Amtshilfe im Bereich der Polizei
Aufgehoben	Art. 349
1. Schutz von Personendaten
a. Rechtsgrundlagen	Art. 349a
b. Gleichbehandlung	Art. 349b
c. Bekanntgabe von Personendaten an einen Drittstaat oder 
an ein internationales Organ	Art. 349c
d. Bekanntgabe von Personendaten aus einem Schengen-
Staat an einen Drittstaat oder an ein internationales Organ	Art. 349d
e. Bekanntgabe von Personendaten an einen in einem 
Drittstaat niedergelassenen Empfanger	Art. 349e
f. Richtigkeit der Personendaten	Art. 349f
g. Prufung der Rechtmassigkeit der Datenbearbeitung	Art. 349g
h. Untersuchung	Art. 349h
2. Zusammenarbeit mit INTERPOL.
a. Zustandigkeit	Art. 350
b. Aufgaben	Art. 351
c. Datenschutz	Art. 352
d. Finanzhilfen und Abgeltungen	Art. 353
3. Zusammenarbeit bei der Identifizierung von Personen. 	Art. 354
4. ... 	Art. 355
5. Zusammenarbeit mit Europol.
a. Datenaustausch	Art. 355a
b. Mandatserweiterung	Art. 355b
5bis. Zusammenarbeit im Rahmen der Schengen-
Assoziierungsabkommen.
Zustandigkeit	Art. 355c
5ter. ...	Art. 355d
5quater. SIRENE-Buro	Art. 355e
Aufgehoben	Art. 355f und 355g
Aufgehoben	Art. 356-361
6. Mitteilung bei Pornografie 	Art. 362
Funfter Titel: ...
Aufgehoben	Art. 363 und 364
Sechster Titel: ...
Aufgehoben	Art. 365-371a
Siebenter Titel: Straf- und Massnahmenvollzug, 
Bewahrungshilfe, Anstalten und Einrichtungen
1. Pflicht zum Straf- und Massnahmenvollzug	Art. 372
2. Geldstrafen, Bussen, Kosten und Einziehungen.
Vollstreckung	Art. 373
Verfugungsrecht	Art. 374
3. Gemeinnutzige Arbeit	Art. 375
4. Bewahrungshilfe	Art. 376
5. Anstalten und Einrichtungen.
Pflicht der Kantone zur Errichtung und zum Betrieb	Art. 377
Zusammenarbeit zwischen den Kantonen	Art. 378
Zulassung von Privatanstalten	Art. 379
Kostentragung	Art. 380
7a. Titel:  
Haftung bei Aufhebung der lebenslanglichen Verwahrung
	Art. 380a
Achter Titel:  
Begnadigung, Amnestie, Wiederaufnahme des Verfahrens
1. Begnadigung.
Zustandigkeit	Art. 381
Begnadigungsgesuch	Art. 382
Wirkungen	Art. 383
2. Amnestie	Art. 384
3. Wiederaufnahme des Verfahrens	Art. 385
Neunter Titel: Praventionsmassnahmen, erganzende 
Bestimmungen und allgemeine Ubergangsbestimmungen
1. Praventionsmassnahmen	Art. 386
2. Erganzende Bestimmungen des Bundesrates	Art. 387
3. Allgemeine Ubergangsbestimmungen.
Vollzug fruherer Urteile	Art. 388
Verjahrung	Art. 389
Antragsdelikte	Art. 390
4. Kantonale Einfuhrungsbestimmungen	Art. 391
5. Inkrafttreten dieses Gesetzes	Art. 392
Schlussbestimmungen der Anderung  
vom 18. Marz 1971
Schlussbestimmungen der Anderung  
vom 13. Dezember 2002
Ubergangsbestimmung der Anderung  
vom 12. Dezember 2014
Ubergangsbestimmung zur Anderung  
vom 26. September 2014
Ubergangsbestimmung zur Anderung  
vom 19. Juni 2015
 AS 54 757, 57 1328 and BS 3 203
 	SR 101
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 30 Sept. 2011 in force since 1 July 2012 (AS 2012 2575; 
BBl 2010 5651 5677).
 	BBl 1918 IV 1
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 
3535; BBl 1999 1979).
  	SR 0.101
 	Expression amended by Annex No 14 of the FA of 19 Dec. 2008 (Adult Protection, Law 
of Persons and Law of Children), in force since 1 Jan. 2013  
(AS 2011 725; BBl 2006 7001). This amendment has been made throughout the text.
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Inserted by Annex No 1 of the FedD of 27 Sept. 2013 (Lanzarote Convention), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 1159; BBl 2012 7571).
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FedD of 27 Sept. 2013 (Lanzarote Convention), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 1159; BBl 2012 7571).
 	SR 0.101
 	SR 0.101
 	SR 0.101
 	SR 311.1
 	Amended by Art. 44 No 1 of the Juvenile Criminal Law Act of 20 June 2003, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3545; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055;  
BBl 2012 8819).
 	Term in accordance with No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827). This change 
has been made in the provisions specified in the AS.
 	Amended by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021  
(AS 2021 360; BBl 2018 6427).
 	SR 812.121
 	Footnote relevant to German text only.
 	Footnote relevant to German text only.
 	Second sentence amended by Annex No 14 of the FA of 19 Dec. 2008 (Adult Protection, 
Law of Persons and Law of Children), in force since 1 Jan. 2013 (AS 2011 725; 
BBl 2006 7001).
 	Amended by Annex No 14 of the FA of 19 Dec. 2008 (Adult Protection, Law of Persons 
and Law of Children), in force since 1 Jan. 2013 (AS 2011 725; BBl 2006 7001).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Second and third sentences amended by Annex No 5 of the FA of 19 June 2020 
(Company Law), in force since 1 Jan. 2023 (AS 2020 4005; 2022 109; BBl 2017 399).
 	Forth sentence inserted by by Annex No 5 of the FA of 19 June 2020 (Company Law), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2023 (AS 2020 4005; 2022 109; BBl 2017 399).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), with effect from 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), with effect from 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by Annex 1 No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, in force 
since 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Second sentence amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law 
of Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003 (Prosecution of Offences within Marriage or 
Registered Partnerships), in force since 1 April 2004  
(AS 2004 1403 1407; BBl 2003 1909 1937).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on the Amendment of Reparation 
Arrangements, in force since 1 July 2019 (AS 2019 1809; BBl 2018 3757 4925).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003 (Prosecution of Offences within Marriage or 
Registered Partnerships), in force since 1 April 2004 (AS 2004 1403 1407; BBl 2003 
1909 1937).
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Amended by Art. 37 No 1 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288). 
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Inserted by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Amended by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Inserted by No I 3 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 on Improved Protection for Victims of 
Violence, in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2019 2273; BBl 2017 7307).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Amended by Annex No 14 of the FA of 19 Dec. 2008 (Adult Protection, Law of Persons 
and Law of Children), in force since 1 Jan. 2013 (AS 2011 725; BBl 2006 7001).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Amended by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2015 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance, in force since 1 Jan. 2017 (AS 2016 4687; BBl 2014 453).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	SR 312.0
 	Second sentence amended by Annex 1 No 4 of the FA of 17 June 2022, in force since  
1 Jan. 2024 (AS 2023 468; BBl 2019 6697).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	This Art. has been repealed (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	SR 313.0
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021  
(AS 2021 360; BBl 2018 6427).
 	SR 0.518.12, 0.518.23, 0.518.42, 0.518.51
 	SR 142.20
 	SR 812.121
 	Inserted by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since  
1 July 2021 (AS 2021 360; BBl 2018 6427).
 	SR 121
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	The correction of 21 June 2017, published on 11 July 2017 relates to the French text only 
(AS 2017 3695).
 	SR 142.31
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055;  
BBl 2012 8819).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), with 
effect from 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015  
(AS 2014 2055; BBl 2012 8819).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and Contact 
Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055; 
BBl 2012 8819).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and Contact 
Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055; 
BBl 2012 8819).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), with 
effect from 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 March 2018 (Implementation of Art. 123c Cst.), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 3803; BBl 2016 6115).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and Contact 
Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055;  
BBl 2012 8819).
 	Originally: Art. 67b.
 	No longer required as a result of No IV 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the 
Law on Criminal Sanctions), with effect from 1 Jan. 2018  
(AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 4 of the FA of 17 June 2022, with effect from 1 Jan. 2024  
(AS 2023 468; BBl 2019 6697).
 	Amended by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021 (AS 2021 360; BBl 
2018 6427).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I 6 of the FA of 25 Sept. 2020 on Police Counterterrorism Measures, in 
Force since 1 June 2022 (AS 2021 565; 2022 300; BBl 2019 4751).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), with effect from 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	SR 0.191.02
 	Inserted by No I 6 of the FA of 25 Sept. 2020 on Police Counterterrorism Measures, in 
Force since 1 June 2022 (AS 2021 565; 2022 300; BBl 2019 4751).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	Originally let. c.
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 26 Sept. 2014 on Victims' Right to Information, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2016 (AS 2015 1623; BBl 2014 889 913). See also the transitional provision 
to this amendment at the end of the text.
 	SR 312.5
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015  
(AS 2014 2055; BBl 2012 8819).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 21 June 2013 (Extension of Prosecution Time Limits), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2014 (AS 2013 4417; BBl 2012 9253).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	AS 2002 2993
 	Amended by Art. 2 No 1 of the FedD of 24 March 2006 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Optional Protocol of 25 May 2000 to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child, on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, in force 
since 1 Dec. 2006 (AS 2006 5437 5440; BBl 2005 2807).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 15 June 2012 (Non-applicability of Limitation to Sexual 
or Pornography Offences against Prepubescent Children), (AS 2012 5951; BBl 2011 
5977). Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex 
Offences, in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation 
in Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	Third sentence inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 15 June 2012 (Non-applicability of 
Limitation to Sexual or Pornography Offences against Prepubescent Children), in force 
since 1 Jan. 2013 (AS 2012 5951; BBl 2011 5977).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation 
in Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (Criminal Law on Corruption), in force 
since 1 July 2016 (AS 2016 1287; BBl 2014 3591).
 	Terminological footnote relevant to German only.
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015  
(AS 2014 2055; BBl 2012 8819).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), with effect from 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	This Article contains no provisions for technical drafting reasons. Corrected by the 
Drafting Committee of the Federal Assembly (Art. 58 para. 1 ParlA; SR 171.10).
 	Amended by Art. 37 No 1 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288). 
 	AS 2006 3583
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 3 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 March 2001 (Abortion), in force since 1 Oct. 2002  
(AS 2002 2989 2992; BBl 1998 3005 5376).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 4 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 22 March 2002 (Limitation of the Right to Prosecute), in 
force since 1 Oct. 2002 (AS 2002 2986 2988; BBl 2002 2673 1649).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 March 2001 (Abortion), in force since 1 Oct. 2002  
(AS 2002 2989 2992; BBl 1998 3005 5376).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 March 2001 (Abortion), in force since 1 Oct. 2002  
(AS 2002 2989 2992; BBl 1998 3005 5376).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 5 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 23 March 2001 (Abortion), with effect from 1 Oct. 2002 
(AS 2002 2989; BBl 1998 3005 5376).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Second paragraph repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007  
(AS 2006 3459; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003 (Prosecution of Offences within Marriage or 
Registered Partnerships), in force since 1 April 2004 (AS 2004 1403 1407; BBl 2003 
1909 1937).
 	Inserted by Annex No 18 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288).
 	Originally para. 4. Inserted by No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003 (Prosecution of Offences 
within Marriage or Registered Partnerships), in force since 1 April 2004 (AS 2004 1403 
1407; BBl 2003 1909 1937). 
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 30 Sept. 2011, in force since 1 July 2012 (AS 2012 2575; 
BBl 2010 5651 5677).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Inserted by Annex No 18 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989 (AS 1989 2449; BBl 1985 II 1009). Amended 
by No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003 (Prosecution of Offences within Marriage or Registered 
Partnerships), in force since 1 April 2004 (AS 2004 1403 1407; BBl 2003 1909 1937).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995 (AS 1994 2290 
2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, with effect from 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449; 
BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990 (AS 1989 2449 
2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 6 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 20 March 2008, in force since 1 July 2011 (AS 2009 2623, 
2011 2559; BBl 2006 8573 8645).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995 (AS 1994 2290 
2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 8 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 12 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by Art. 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 March 2011 (Council of Europe Convention 
on Cybercrime), in force since 1 Jan. 2012 (AS 2011 6293; BBl 2010 4697).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Second paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Second paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 20 March 2015 (Implementation of Art. 121 para. 3-6 
Federal Constitution on the expulsion of foreign nationals convicted of certain criminal 
offences), in force since 1 Oct. 2016 (AS 2016 2329; BBl 2013 5975).
 	Inserted by Annex No 2 of the Telecommunications Act of 30 April 1997, in force since 
1 Jan. 1998 (AS 1997 2187; BBl 1996 III 1405).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by Annex No 5 of the FA of 19 June 2020 (Company Law), in force since  
1 Jan. 2023 (AS 2020 4005; 2022 109, 110; BBl 2017 399).
 	SR 220
 	Correction by the Federal Assembly Drafting Committee of 22 Nov. 2023, published on 6 
Dec. 2023 (AS 2023 739).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 3 Oct. 2008 on the Implementation of the Revised 
Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, in force since 1 Feb. 2009  
(AS 2009 361 367; BBl 2007 6269).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 12 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Third para. amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No II 3 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2012, with effect from 1 May 2013  
(AS 2013 1103; BBl 2011 6873).
 	Inserted by Art. 46 of the Stock Exchange Act of 24 March 1995  
(AS 1997 68; BBl 1993 I 1369). Repealed by No II 3 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2012, with 
effect from 1 May 2013 (AS 2013 1103; BBl 2011 6873).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, 
in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	SR 281.1
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No II 3 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, with effect from 1 Jan. 2007  
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), with effect from 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	This number is now repealed.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968, in force since 1 May 1969  
(AS 1969 319 322; BBl 1968 I 585).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 I 1249).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 22 March 2002 (Limitation of the Right to Prosecute), in 
force since 1 Oct. 2002 (AS 2002 2986 2988; BBl 2002 2673 1649).
 	Amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007  
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968, in force since 1 May 1969  
(AS 1969 319 322; BBl 1968 I 585).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968, in force since 1 May 1969  
(AS 1969 319 322; BBl 1968 I 585).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968 (AS 1969 319; BBl 1968 I 585). Amended by 
No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, in force 
since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968, in force since 1 May 1969  
(AS 1969 319 322; BBl 1968 I 585).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968 (AS 1969 319; BBl 1968 I 585). Amended by 
No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003, in force since 1 March 2004  
(AS 2004 823 824; BBl 2001 2632 5816).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968, in force since 1 May 1969  
(AS 1969 319 322; BBl 1968 I 585).
 	Terminological amendment relevant only to the German text.
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 20 Dec. 1968 (AS 1969 319; BBl 1968 I 585). Amended by 
No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, in force 
since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No VII of the FA of 23 March 1979 on the Protection of Personal Privacy  
(AS 1979 1170; BBl 1976 I 529 II 1569). Amended by Annex No 1 of the FA of 
6 Oct. 2000 on the Surveillance of Post and Telecommunications, in force since 
1 Jan. 2002 (AS 2001 3096; BBl 1998 4241).
 	Repealed by Annex 2 No 1 of the FA of 17 June 2022, with effect from 1 Jan. 2024  
(AS 2023 468; BBl 2019 6697).
 	Inserted by Annex No 4 of the FA of 19 June 1992 on Data Protection, (AS 1993 1945; 
BBl 1988 II 413). Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of  
25 Sept. 2020, in force since 1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since  
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by Annex No 18 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 3 Oct. 2003 (Prosecution of Offences within Marriage or 
Registered Partnerships), in force since 1 April 2004  
(AS 2004 1403 1407; BBl 2003 1909 1937).
 	Inserted by No I 6 of the FA of 15 June 2012 on Measures against Forced Marriages, in 
force since 1 July 2013 (AS 2013 1035; BBl 2011 2185).
 	Amended by Art. 2 No 1 of the FedD of 24 March 2006 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Optional Protocol of 25 May 2000 to the Convention on the Rights 
of the Child, on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, in force 
since 1 Dec. 2006 (AS 2006 5437 5440; BBl 2005 2807).
 	AS 2012 7501
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 9 Oct. 1981, in force since 1 Oct. 1982 (AS 1982 1530 
1534; BBl 1980 I 1241).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 9 Oct. 1981, in force since 1 Oct. 1982 (AS 1982 1530 
1534; BBl 1980 I 1241).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 9 Oct. 1981, in force since 1 Oct. 1982 (AS 1982 1530 
1534; BBl 1980 I 1241).
 	Amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 
3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Second sentence amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Inserted by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2015 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance, in force since 1 Jan. 2017 (AS 2016 4687; BBl 2014 453).
 	Amended by No 1 of the FA of 21 June 1991, in force since 1 Oct. 1992 (AS 1992 1670 
1678; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 21 March 1997, with effect from 1 Sept. 1997  
(AS 1997 1626; BBl 1996 IV 1318 1322).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 March 1997 (AS 1997 1626; BBl 1996 IV 1318 1322). 
Repealed by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 2001 (Limitation of Right to Prosecute in general 
and in cases of Sexual Offences against Children), with effect from 1 Oct. 2002  
(AS 2002 2993; BBl 2000 2943).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
with effect from 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FedD of 27 Sept. 2013 (Lanzarote Convention), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 1159; BBl 2012 7571).
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FedD of 27 Sept. 2013 (Lanzarote Convention), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 1159; BBl 2012 7571).
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FedD of 27 Sept. 2013 (Lanzarote Convention), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 1159; BBl 2012 7571).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
with effect from 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
 	These repealed articles have (with the exception of Art. 211) been replaced by Articles 
195, 196, 197, 198, 199 (see Commentary on Dispatch No 23; BBl 1985 II 1009). 
Art. 211 has been deleted without replacement.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990  
(AS 1989 2449 2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 2001 (Limitation of Right to Prosecute in general 
and in cases of Sexual Offences against Children; AS 2002 2993; BBl 2000 2943).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, with effect from 1 Oct. 2002  
(AS 1989 2449; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by Annex No 18 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, with effect from 1 Jan. 1990  
(AS 1989 2449; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990  
(AS 1989 2449 2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, with effect from 1 Jan. 1990  
(AS 1989 2449; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 23 June 1989, in force since 1 Jan. 1990  
(AS 1989 2449 2456; BBl 1985 II 1009).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by Annex No 4 of the FA of 21 June 2013 (Parental Responsibility), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 357; BBl 2011 9077).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by Annex No II 2 of the Nuclear Energy Act of 21 March 2003  
(AS 2004 4719; BBl 2001 2665). Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the 
Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 
2827).
 	Inserted by Annex No II 2 of the Nuclear Energy Act of 21 March 2003  
(AS 2004 4719; BBl 2001 2665). Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the 
Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 
2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by Annex No 1 of the Gene Technology Act of 21 March 2003, in force since 
1 Jan. 2004 (AS 2003 4803; BBl 2000 2391).
 	Amended by Art. 86 No 1 of the Epidemics Act of 28 Sept. 2012, in force since 
1 Jan. 2016 (AS 2015 1435; BBl 2011 311).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Second paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
  	Amended by Annex No 3 of the FA of 22 Dec. 1999 on Currency and Payment 
Instruments, in force since 1 May 2000 (AS 2000 1144; BBl 1999 7258).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
  	Amended by Annex No 3 of the FA of 22 Dec. 1999 on Currency and Payment 
Instruments, in force since 1 May 2000 (AS 2000 1144; BBl 1999 7258).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by Annex No 3 of the FA of 22 Dec. 1999 on Currency and Payment 
Instruments, in force since 1 May 2000 (AS 2000 1144; BBl 1999 7258).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995 (AS 1994 2290 
2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995 (AS 1994 2290 
2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995  
(AS 1994 2290 2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 9 Oct. 1981, in force since 1 Oct. 1982  
(AS 1982 1530 1534; BBl 1980 I 1241).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation in 
Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 9 Oct. 1981, in force since 1 Oct. 1982  
(AS 1982 1530 1534; BBl 1980 I 1241).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 30 Sept. 2011 in force since 1 July 2012  
(AS 2012 2575; BBl 2010 5651 5677).
 	Inserted by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2015 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from 
Enforced Disappearance, in force since 1 Jan. 2017 (AS 2016 4687; BBl 2014 453).
  	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation 
in Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	Wording of the sentence in accordance with No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 18 March 1994 (AS 1994 1614 1618; BBl 1993 III 277). 
Amended by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021  
(AS 2021 360; BBl 2018 6427).
  	SR 0.518.12, 0.518.23, 0.518.42, 0.518.51
  	Inserted by Art. 41 of the Weapons Act of 20 June 1997, in force since 1 Jan. 1999  
(AS 1998 2535; BBl 1996 I 1053).
 	New designation of criminal penalties in accordance with No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 
13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
  	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 21 March 2003 (Financing of Terrorism), in force since 
1 Oct. 2003 (AS 2003 3043 3047; BBl 2002 5390).
  	Inserted by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021 (AS 2021 360; BBl 
2018 6427).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by Art. 1 of the FA of 18 June 1993 (AS 1994 2887; BBl 1992 III 269). 
Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 14 Dec. 2018 (Discrimination and Incitement to Hatred 
on the Grounds of Sexual Orientation), in force since 1 July 2020 (AS 2020 1609; BBl 
2018 3773 5231).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007  
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
  	Inserted by No I of the FA of 24 March 2000 (AS 2000 2725; BBl 1999 5327). Amended 
by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation in 
Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
  	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation in 
Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	Geneva Convention of 12 Aug. 1949 for the Amelioration of the Condition of the 
Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (GA I), SR 0.518.12; Geneva 
Convention of 12 Aug. 1949 for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and 
Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (GA II), SR 0.518.23; Geneva 
Convention of 12 Aug. 1949 relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (GA III), SR 
0.518.42; Geneva Convention of 12 Aug. 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian 
Persons in Time of War (GA IV), SR 0.518.51.
 	SR 0.120
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 16 June 2023 on a Revision of the Law on Sex Offences, 
in force since 1 July 2024 (AS 2024 27; BBl 2018 2827; 2022 687, 1011).
  	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Amendment of Federal Legislation in 
Implementation of the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court, in force since 
1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 4963; BBl 2008 3863).
 	SR 312.0
 	SR 170.32
 	SR 171.10
 	SR 172.010
 	SR 173.110
 	SR 173.32
 	SR 173.41
 	SR 173.71
 	SR 101
 	SR 131.211/.235
 	Term in accordance with No II 1 para. 11 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 
1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979). This amendment has been taken into 
account throughout the Second Book.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 I 1249).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 10 Oct. 1997, in force since 1 April 1998  
(AS 1998 852 856; BBl 1996 IV 525).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 10 Oct. 1997, in force since 1 April 1998  
(AS 1998 852 856; BBl 1996 IV 525).
 	Originally No 2.
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	Third paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951 
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	Fourth paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	SR 101
 	SR 131.211/.235
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 5 Oct 1950 (AS 1951 1; BBl 1949 I 1249). Repealed by No 
I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, with effect 
from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendment to the Law on 
Criminal Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by Art. 88 No I of the FA of 17 Dec. 1976 on Political Rights, in force since 
1 July 1978 (AS 1978 688; BBl 1975 I 1317).
 	Repealed by No I of the FA of 18 March 1971, with effect from 1 July 1971  
(AS 1971 777; BBl 1965 I 561).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	SR 742.101
 	SR 745.1
 	[AS 2009 5597, 6019; 2012 5619 No I 5; 2013 1603. AS 2016 1845 Annex No I 1]. See 
now: the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (SR 742.41).
 	SR 745.2
 	Second paragraph amended by Art. 11 para. 2 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Security 
Units of Public Transport Companies, in force since 1 Oct. 2011  
(AS 2011 3961; BBl 2010 891 915).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951  
(AS 1951 1 16; BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	SR 742.101
 	SR 745.1
 	[AS 2009 5597, 6019; 2012 5619 No I 5; 2013 1603. AS 2016 1845 Annex No I 1]. See 
now: the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (SR 742.41).
 	SR 745.2
 	Amended by Art. 11 para. 2 of the FA of 18 June 2010 on the Security Units of Public 
Transport Companies, in force since 1 Oct. 2011 (AS 2011 3961; BBl 2010 891 915).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 22 Dec. 1999, with effect from 1 May 2000 (Revision of 
the Criminal Law on Corruption; AS 2000 1121; BBl 1999 5497).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 16 June 2017 (Publication of Official Secret Proceedings), 
in force since 1 March 2018 (AS 2018 567; BBl 2016 7329 7575).
 		Inserted by No I of the FA of 10 Oct. 1997 (AS 1998 852; BBl 1996 IV 525). Amended 
by No I of the FA of 16 June 2017 (Publication of Official Secret Proceedings), in force 
since 1 March 2018 (AS 2018 567; BBl 2016 7329 7575).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055;  
BBl 2012 8819).
 	SR 321.0
 	SR 311.1
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and 
Contact Prohibition and Exclusion Orders, in force since 1 Jan. 2015 (AS 2014 2055;  
BBl 2012 8819).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951 (AS 1951 1 16;  
BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951 (AS 1951 1 16; 
BBl 1949 1 1249).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 5 Oct. 1950, in force since 5 Jan. 1951 (AS 1951 1 16; 
BBl 19491 1249).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 22 March 2002 (Limitation of the Right to Prosecute), in 
force since 1 Oct. 2002 (AS 2002 2986 2988; BBl 2002 2673 1649).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Part of sentence amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 9 Oct. 1981, in force since 1 Oct. 1982  
(AS 1982 1530 1534; BBl 1980 I 1241).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 23 March 1990, in force since 1 Aug. 1990  
(AS 1990 1077 1078; BBl 1989 II 1061).
 	Amended by No I 4 of the FA of 12 Dec. 2014 on the Implementation of the 2012 
Revision of the Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, in force since 
1 Jan. 2016 (AS 2015 1389; BBl 2014 605).
 	SR 642.11
 	SR 642.14
 	Inserted by No I 4 of the FA of 12 Dec. 2014 on the Implementation of the 2012 Revision 
of the Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, in force since 1 Jan. 2016 
(AS 2015 1389; BBl 2014 605). See also the transitional provision to this amendment at 
the end of the text.
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021  
(AS 2021 360; BBl 2018 6427).
 	Corrected by the Drafting Committee of the Federal Assembly  
(Art. 33 ParlPA; AS 1974 1051).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 23 March 1990, in force since 1 Aug. 1990  
(AS 1990 1077 1078; BBl 1989 II 1061).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 18 March 1994, in force since 1 Aug. 1994  
(AS 1994 1614 1618; BBl 1993 III 277).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 18 March 1994 (AS 1994 1614; BBl 1993 III 277). 
Amended by No I 4 of the FA of 12 Dec. 2014 on the Implementation of the 2012 
Revision of the Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, in force since 
1 Jan. 2016 (AS 2015 1389; BBl 2014 605).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, 
in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, 
in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
  	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 22 June 2001 (Offences against the Administration of 
Justice before International Courts), in force since 1 July 2002  
(AS 2002 1491 1492; BBl 2001 391).
 	Second paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 22 Dec. 1999, with effect from 1 May 2000 (Revision of 
the Criminal Law on Corruption; AS 2000 1121; BBl 1999 5497).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995  
(AS 1994 2290 2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by Art. 24 No 1 of the FA of 20 June 2003 on Covert Investigations, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2005 (AS 2004 1409; BBl 1998 4241). Amended by Annex No 3 of the FA of 
23 Dec. 2011, in force since 16 July 2012 (AS 2012 3745; BBl 2007 5037, 2010 7841).
 	SR 121
 	Amended by Annex No II 2 of the FedD of 25 Sept. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism and 
its Additional Protocol and the Strengthening of Criminal Justice Instruments for 
combating Terrorism and Organised Crime, in force since 1 July 2021  
(AS 2021 360; BBl 2018 6427).
 	Amended by Annex No II 5 of the Intelligence Service Act of 25 Sept. 2015, in force 
since 1 Sept. 2017 (AS 2017 4095; BBl 2014 2105).
 	SR 312.2
 	Inserted by Annex No 3 of the FA of 23 Dec. 2011 on Extra-Procedural Witness 
Protection, in force since 1 Jan. 2013 (AS 2012 6715; BBl 2011 1).
 	Second paragraph amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of 
Sentencing Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No 7 of the Information Security Act of 18 Dec. 2020, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 232, 750; BBl 2017 2953).
 	SR 220
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the Healthcare Occupations Act of 30 Sept. 2016, in force 
since 1 Feb. 2020 (AS 2020 57; BBl 2015 8715).
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FA of 15 Dec. 2017 (Child Protection), in force since 
1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 2947; BBl 2015 3431).
 	Inserted by Annex No 4 of the FA of 19 June 1992 on Data Protection  
(AS 1993 1945; BBl 1988 II 413). Amended by Annex No 2 of the Human Research Act 
of 30 Sept. 2011, in force since 1 Jan. 2014 (AS 2013 3215; BBl 2009 8045).
 	SR 810.30
 	Inserted by Annex No 2 of the Telecommunications Act of 30 April 1997, in force since 
1 Jan. 1998 (AS 1997 2187; BBl 1996 III 1405).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 10 Oct. 1997, in force since 1 April 1998  
(AS 1998 852 856; BBl 1996 IV 525).
 	Part of sentence amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Part of sentence amended by No II 2 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 10 Oct. 1997 (AS 1998 852 856; BBl 1996 IV 525). 
Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 22 Dec. 1999 (Revision of the Criminal Law on 
Corruption), in force since 1 May 2000 (AS 2000 1121 1126; BBl 1999 5497).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (Criminal Law on Corruption), in force 
since 1 July 2016 (AS 2016 1287; BBl 2014 3591).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (Criminal Law on Corruption), in force 
since 1 July 2016 (AS 2016 1287; BBl 2014 3591).
 	Paragraph inserted by Art. 2 No 2 of the FedD of 7 Oct. 2005 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Criminal Law Convention and the Additional Protocol of the 
Council of Europe on Corruption, in force since 1 July 2006  
(AS 2006 2371 2374; BBl 2004 6983).
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (Criminal Law on Corruption), in force 
since 1 July 2016 (AS 2016 1287; BBl 2014 3591).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (Criminal Law on Corruption), in force since 
1 July 2016 (AS 2016 1287; BBl 2014 3591).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 25 Sept. 2015 (Criminal Law on Corruption), in force since 
1 July 2016 (AS 2016 1287; BBl 2014 3591).
 	Originally Title 19.
 	Amended by Annex No 8 of the FA of 16 Dec. 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1997  
(AS 1995 1227 1307; BBl 1991 III 1).
 	SR 281.1
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by Annex No 8 of the FA of 16 Dec. 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1997  
(AS 1995 1227 1307; BBl 1991 III 1).
 	SR 281.1
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No III 2 of the FA of 19 June 2020 (Indirect Counter-Proposal to the Popular 
Initiative "For responsible businesses - protecting human rights and the environment"), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2022 (AS 2021 846; BBl 2017 399).
 	SR 220
 	Inserted by No III 2 of the FA of 19 June 2020 (Indirect Counter-Proposal to the Popular 
Initiative "For responsible businesses - protecting human rights and the environment"), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2022 (AS 2021 846; BBl 2017 399).
  	SR 220
 	Originally Article 325bis. Inserted by No II Art. 4 of the FA of 15 Dec. 1989 on the 
Amendment of the CO (Leases and Tenancies) (AS 1990 802; BBl 1985 I 1389 at the end, 
final provisions on Titles VIII and VIIIbis). Amended by No III 2 of the FA of 19 June 
2020 (Indirect Counter-Proposal to the Popular Initiative "For responsible businesses - 
protecting human rights and the environment"), in force since 1 Jan. 2022  
(AS 2021 846; BBl 2017 399).
 	SR 220
 	Repealed by No II 3 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, with effect from 1 Jan. 2007  
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Footnote relevant to German text only.
 	Inserted by No II Art. 4 of the FA of 15 Dec. 1989 on the Amendment of the CO (Leases 
and Tenancies), in force since 1 July 1990  
(AS 1990 802; BBl 1985 I 1389 at the end, final provisions on Titles VIII and VIIIbis).
 	Amended by No III 2 of the FA of 19 June 2020 (Indirect Counter-Proposal to the Popular 
Initiative "For responsible businesses - protecting human rights and the environment"), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2022 (AS 2021 846; BBl 2017 399).
 	Footnote relevant to German text only.
 	Amended by No III 2 of the FA of 19 June 2020 (Indirect Counter-Proposal to the Popular 
Initiative "For responsible businesses - protecting human rights and the environment"), in 
force since 1 Jan. 2022 (AS 2021 846; BBl 2017 399).
 	Footnote relevant to German text only.
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994 (AS 1994 2290; BBl 1991 II 969). Amended 
by Annex No 5 of the FA of 16 Dec. 2005 (Law on Limited Liability Companies and 
Amendments to the Law on Companies Limited by Shares, Cooperatives, the Commercial 
Register and Business Names), in force since 1 Jan. 2008  
(AS 2007 4791; BBl 2002 3148, 2004 3969).
 	Corrected by the Drafting Committee of the Federal Assembly (Art. 58 para. 2 ParlA;  
SR 171.10).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 17 June 1994, in force since 1 Jan. 1995  
(AS 1994 2290 2307; BBl 1991 II 969).
 	Amended by No I 2 of the FA of 21 June 2019 on Implementing the Recommendations of 
the Global Forum on Transparency and Transfer of Information for Tax Purposes, in force 
since 1 Nov. 2019 (AS 2019 3161; BBl 2019 279).
 	SR 220
 	Inserted by No I 2 of the FA of 21 June 2019 on Implementing the Recommendations of 
the Global Forum on Transparency and Transfer of Information for Tax Purposes, in force 
since 1 Nov. 2019 (AS 2019 3161; BBl 2019 279).
 	SR 220
 	SR 951.31
 	Inserted by Annex 1 No 2 of the FA of 19 March 2021, in force since 1 Jan. 2023  
(AS 2021 656; 2022 551; BBl 2019 5451).
 	RS 210
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Penalties revised by No II 1 para. 16 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007 
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	Repealed by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing 
Policy, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Amended by No III of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, in force since 1 Jan. 2007  
(AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	SR 313.0
 	Repealed by No I 5 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Secondary 
Criminal Law  with the Amended Law on Sanctions, with effect from 1 July 2023 (AS 
2023 254; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021 on the Harmonisation of Sentencing Policy, 
in force since 1 July 2023 (AS 2023 259; BBl 2018 2827).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 5 of the FA of 13 June 2008 on the Federal Police Information 
System, with effect from 5 Dec. 2008 (AS 2008 4989; BBl 2006 5061).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since 
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	SR 235.1
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Abbreviation in accordance with Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 
2020, in force since 1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941). This amendment has 
been made in the provisions specified in the AS.
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
  	SR 235.1
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
  	SR 235.1
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	SR 351.1
 	SR 235.1
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 26 of the Data Protection Act of 25 Sept. 2020, in force since 
1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2022 491; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, in 
force since 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	The name of this administrative unit was changed in application of Art. 20 para. 2 of the 
Publications Ordinance of 7 Oct. 2015 (SR 170.512.1).
 	Amended by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Exchange of Notes between Switzerland and the EU relating to the 
Adoption of the Legislation on the Establishment, Operation and Use of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS), in force since 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2021 365; 2022 638; BBl 2020 
3465).
 	SR 361
 	SR 142.31
 	SR 142.20
 	SR 631.0
  	SR 363
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FA of 17 Dec. 2021, in force since 1 Aug. 2023  
(AS 2023 309; BBl 2021 44).
 	Amended by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Exchange of Notes between Switzerland and the EU relating to the 
Adoption of the Legislation on the Establishment, Operation and Use of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS), in force since 23. Jan. 2023 (AS 2021 365; 2022 638; BBl 
2020 3465).
 	Amended by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Exchange of Notes between Switzerland and the EU relating to the 
Adoption of the Legislation on the Establishment, Operation and Use of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS), in force since 23. Jan. 2023 (AS 2021 365; 2022 638; BBl 
2020 3465).
 	Inserted by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Exchange of Notes between Switzerland and the EU relating to the 
Adoption of the Legislation on the Establishment, Operation and Use of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS), in force since 23. Jan. 2023 (AS 2021 365; 2022 638; BBl 
2020 3465).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 5 of the FA of 13 June 2008 on the Federal Police Information 
System, with effect from 5 Dec. 2008 (AS 2008 4989; BBl 2006 5061).
 	Inserted by Art. 2 of the FedD of 7 Oct. 2005 on the Approval and Implementation of the 
Agreement between Switzerland and Europol, in force since 1 April 2006 (AS 2006 1017 
1018; BBl 2005 983).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by Annex 2 No 1 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Exchange of Notes between Switzerland and the EU relating to the 
Adoption of the Legislation on the Establishment, Operation and Use of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS), in force since 1 Sept. 2023 (AS 2021 365; 2022 491; BBl 2020 
3465).
 	SR 0.360.268.2
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, in force since  
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Inserted by Art. 2 of the FedD of 7 Oct. 2005 on the Approval and Implementation of the 
Agreement between Switzerland and Europol, in force since 1 April 2006 (AS 2006 1017 
1018; BBl 2005 983).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	SR 0.360.268.2
 	Inserted by Art. 3 No 4 of the FedD of 17 Dec. 2004 on the Adoption and Implementation 
of the Bilateral Agreements between Switzerland and the EU on the Association to 
Schengen and Dublin, in force since 1 June 2008 (AS 2008 447 2179;  
BBl 2004 5965).
 	Agreement of 26 Oct. 2004 between the Swiss Confederation, the European Union and 
the European Community on the Association of that State with the Implementation, 
Application and Development of the Schengen Acquis (SR 0.362.31); Agreement of 
28 April 2005 between the Swiss Confederation and the Kingdom of Denmark on the 
Establishment of Rights and Obligations between these two States with a view to 
Cooperation on Schengen (SR 0.362.33); Agreement of 17 Dec. 2004 between the Swiss 
Confederation, the Republic of Iceland and the Kingdom of Norway on the 
implementation, application and development of the Schengen Acquis and on the criteria 
and procedure for determining the State responsible for examining an application for 
asylum lodged in Switzerland, Iceland or Norway (SR 0.362.32).
 	Inserted by Art. 3 No 4 of the FedD of 17 Dec. 2004 on the Adoption and Implementation 
of the Bilateral Agreements between Switzerland and the EU on the Association to 
Schengen and Dublin (AS 2008 447 2179; BBl 2004 5965). Repealed by Annex 2 No II 
of the FA of 13 June 2008 on the Federal Police Information System, with effect from 
5 Dec. 2008 (AS 2008 4989; BBl 2006 5061).
 	Inserted by Art. 3 No 4 of the FedD of 17 Dec. 2004 on the Adoption and Implementation 
of the Bilateral Agreements between Switzerland and the EU on the Association to 
Schengen and Dublin, in force since 1 June 2008 (AS 2008 447 2179; BBl 2004 5965).
 	Amended by Annex 1 No 4 of the FedD of 18 Dec. 2020 on the Approval and 
Implementation of the Exchange of Notes between Switzerland and the EU relating to the 
Adoption of the Legislation on the Establishment, Operation and Use of the Schengen 
Information System (SIS), in force since 22 Nov. 2022 (AS 2021 365, 2022 638; BBl 
2020 3465).
 	Inserted by No 4 of the FA of 19 March 2010 on the Implementation of Framework 
Decision 2008/977/JHA on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of 
police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters (AS 2010 3387; BBl 2009 6749). 
Repealed by No II 2 of the FA of 28 Sept. 2018 on the implementation of Directive (EU) 
2016/680 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal 
data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection 
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, with effect from 
1 March 2019 (AS 2019 625; BBl 2017 6941).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085).
 	Amended by Annex No 1 of the FedD of 27 Sept. 2013 (Lanzarote Convention), in force 
since 1 July 2014 (AS 2014 1159; BBl 2012 7571).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No II 8 of the Criminal Procedure Code of 5 Oct. 2007, with effect 
from 1 Jan. 2011 (AS 2010 1881; BBl 2006 1085). Revised by the Federal Assembly 
Drafting Committee on 20 Feb. 2013 (AS 2013 845).
 	Repealed by Annex No 1 of the FA of 15 Dec. 2017 (Child Protection), with effect from 
1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2018 2947; BBl 2015 3431).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, with 
effect from 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and Contact 
Prohibition and Exclusion Orders (AS 2014 2055; BBl 2012 8819). Repealed by Annex 1 
No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, with effect from 23 Jan. 2023  
(AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, with 
effect from 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	Inserted by No I 1 of the FA of 13 Dec. 2013 on Activity Prohibition Orders and Contact 
Prohibition and Exclusion Orders (AS 2014 2055; BBl 2012 8819). Repealed by Annex 1 
No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, with effect from 23 Jan. 2023  
(AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	Inserted by No II 2 of the FA of 6 Oct. 2006 on the New System of Financial Equalisation 
and the Division of Tasks between the Confederation and the Cantons (NFA), in force 
since 1 Jan. 2008 (AS 2007 5779 5817; BBl 2005 6029).
 	Amended by No II 2 of the FA of 17 March 2017 (Creation of an Appeals Chamber in the 
Federal Criminal Court), in force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2017 5769; BBl 2013 7109,  
2016 6199).
  	SR 312.4
 	Inserted by Annex No 1 of the FA of 19 March 2004 on the Division of Forfeited Assets, 
in force since 1 Aug. 2004 (AS 2004 3503; BBl 2002 441).
 	Amended by No I 1 of the FA of 19 June 2015 (Amendments to the Law of Criminal 
Sanctions), in force since 1 Jan. 2018 (AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721).
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	SR 220
 	SR 170.32
 	Amended by No II 2 of the FA of 17 March 2017 (Creation of an Appeals Chamber in the 
Federal Criminal Court), in force since 1 Jan. 2019 (AS 2017 5769; BBl 2013 7109,  
2016 6199).
 	Amended by Annex No 18 of the Same-Sex Partnership Act of 18 June 2004, in force 
since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2005 5685; BBl 2003 1288). 
 	In force since 1 Jan. 2006 in accordance with the Ordinance of 2 Dec. 2005  
(AS 2005 5723)
 	Inserted by No I of the FA of 21 Dec. 2007 (Indefinite Incarceration of Extremely 
Dangerous Offenders), in force since 1 Aug. 2008 (AS 2008 2961 2964; BBl 2006 889).
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, with 
effect from 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	FA of 18 March 1971, in force since 1 July 1971 (AS 1971 777 807; BBl 1965 I 561) and 
for Art. 49 No 4 para. 2, 82-99, 370, 372, 373, 379 No 1 para. 2, 385 and 391 in force 
since 1 Jan. 1974 (AS 1973 1840). Repealed by No IV of the FA of 13 Dec. 2002, with 
effect from 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979).
 	AS 2006 3459 3535; BBl 1999 1979
 	AS 1971 777
 	BS 3 203
 	AS 1951 1
 	BS 3 203
 	Amended by No I of the FA of 24 March 2006 (Revision of the Law on Sanctions and the 
Register of Convictions), in force since 1 Jan. 2007 (AS 2006 3539 3544; BBl 2005 
4689).
 	AS 1971 777
 	Repealed by Annex 1 No 3 of the Criminal Records Register Act of 17 June 2016, with 
effect from 23 Jan. 2023 (AS 2022 600; BBl 2014 5713).
 	AS 2015 1623; BBl 2014 889 913
  	AS 2015 1389; BBl 2014 605
 	AS 2016 1249; BBl 2012 4721
 
 
 
 
Swiss Criminal Code
Swiss Criminal Code
1 / 1
1 / 1
1 / 1
